Beyond the Hype: A Comprehensive Review of Current Trends in
Generative AI Research, Teaching Practices, and Tools
Juho Leinonen∗
Aalto University
Espoo, Finland
juho.2.leinonen@aalto.fi

Natalie Kiesler∗
Nuremberg Tech
Nuremberg, Germany
natalie.kiesler@th-nuernberg.de

James Prather∗
Abilene Christian University
Abilene, TX, USA
james.prather@acu.edu

4
2
0
2
c
e
D
9
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
3
7
4
1
.
2
1
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Jamie Gorson Benario
Google
Chicago, IL, USA
jamben@google.com

Sam Lau
UC San Diego
La Jolla, CA, USA
lau@ucsd.edu

Narges Norouzi
University of California Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
norouzi@berkeley.edu

Simone Opel
FernUniversität in Hagen
Hagen, Germany
simone.opel@fernuni-hagen.de

Leo Porter
UC San Diego
La Jolla, CA, USA
leporter@ucsd.edu

David H. Smith IV
University of Illinois
Urbana, IL, USA
dhsmith2@illinois.edu

Brent N. Reeves
Abilene Christian University
Abilene, TX, USA
brent.reeves@acu.edu

Sven Strickroth
LMU Munich
Munich, Germany
sven.strickroth@ifi.lmu.de

Stephen MacNeil
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA, USA
stephen.macneil@temple.edu

Vee Pettit
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA, USA
vpettit@vt.edu

Jaromir Savelka
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
jsavelka@cs.cmu.edu

Daniel Zingaro
University of Toronto Mississauga
Mississauga, ON, Canada
daniel.zingaro@utoronto.ca

Abstract
Generative AI (GenAI) is advancing rapidly, and the literature in
computing education is expanding almost as quickly. Initial re-
sponses to GenAI tools were mixed between panic and utopian
optimism. Many were fast to point out the opportunities and chal-
lenges of GenAI. Researchers reported that these new tools are
capable of solving most introductory programming tasks and are
causing disruptions throughout the curriculum. These tools can
write and explain code, enhance error messages, create resources
for instructors, and even provide feedback and help for students
like a traditional teaching assistant. In 2024, new research started to
emerge on the effects of GenAI usage in the computing classroom.
These new data involve the use of GenAI to support classroom
instruction at scale and to teach students how to code with GenAI.
In support of the former, a new class of tools is emerging that can
provide personalized feedback to students on their programming
assignments or teach both programming and prompting skills at
the same time. With the literature expanding so rapidly, this report

∗Co-leader

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal use. Not for
redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published in Proceedings of the 2024
Working Group Reports on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education
(ITiCSE-WGR 2024), July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy, https://doi.org/10.1145/XXXXXXX.

aims to summarize and explain what is happening on the ground in
computing classrooms. We provide a systematic literature review;
a survey of educators and industry professionals; and interviews
with educators using GenAI in their courses, educators studying
GenAI, and researchers who create GenAI tools to support comput-
ing education. The triangulation of these methods and data sources
expands the understanding of GenAI usage and perceptions at this
critical moment for our community.

CCS Concepts
• Social and professional topics → Computing education; •
Computing methodologies → Artificial intelligence.

Keywords
generative AI; GenAI; large language models; artificial intelligence;
pedagogical practices; teaching computing; computing education

ACM Reference Format:
James Prather, Juho Leinonen, Natalie Kiesler, Jamie Gorson Benario, Sam
Lau, Stephen MacNeil, Narges Norouzi, Simone Opel, Vee Pettit, Leo Porter,
Brent N. Reeves, Jaromir Savelka, David H. Smith IV, Sven Strickroth,
and Daniel Zingaro. 2024. Beyond the Hype: A Comprehensive Review
of Current Trends in Generative AI Research, Teaching Practices, and Tools.
In Proceedings of the 2024 Working Group Reports on Innovation and Tech-
nology in Computer Science Education (ITiCSE-WGR 2024), July 8–10, 2024,
Milan, Italy. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 39 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
XXXXXXX

 
 
 
 
 
 
ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

James Prather et al.

1 Introduction
Computing education is undergoing a seismic shift due to the ad-
vances in generative AI (GenAI) [22, 36, 111]. Beginning in early
2022, computing education researchers showed that these models
had incredible accuracy solving programming problems and exam
questions in multiple courses and contexts [6, 40, 41, 48, 68, 119, 125,
126]. Other early work focused on the ways in which GenAI can
provide support to computing educators [16, 37, 81, 82, 94, 124, 127].
Others were quick to raise concerns about potential threats to edu-
cation, such as over-reliance, bias in the models, and educational
misconduct [17, 80, 111, 114]. Computing instructors at the K-12
level are also struggling with integrating GenAI into their curric-
ula [14, 43, 147]. K-12 teachers outside of computing education are
having similar conversations to those occurring in higher educa-
tion [14, 18, 99, 109, 116, 121]. Public perception of GenAI is mixed,
partially because it is a “black box” and that lack of transparency
often increases fear [21], which is one reason why GenAI should
be designed to increase transparency to end users [142].

However, the discussion has largely moved from threats, chal-
lenges, and opportunities [17, 62, 104, 135, 145] to questions of
practical adoption [93, 112]. The 2023 ITiCSE working group on
GenAI summarized the activity within the computing education
community and suggested that the next step is to determine reli-
able and safe ways to implement it into computing curricula [111].
An essay released along with the 2023 ACM/IEEE Computing Cur-
ricula suggested ways in which this could be accomplished based
on preliminary data from a few studies and painted an optimistic
picture of the future [16]. Indeed, many within the community
are calling AI integration just another step in the advancement of
educational technology [1]. Others are discussing how GenAI will
change programming competencies and skills in the future [65, 132].
New assessment methods [61] and ways to measure user interac-
tion with GenAI [98] are required, and although some are arguing
for making assignments “LLM-proof” [20], which seems to be an
impractical goal given the rapid improvement in these models.

Although some have advocated for banning GenAI entirely,
that also seems impractical given its free availability to students
outside the classroom [80]. Furthermore, professional develop-
ers are also discussing the role that GenAI will play within their
work [8, 44, 75, 84, 141, 155], lending credibility to the idea that
students must be prepared for using it after university. Therefore,
thoughtful integration and scaffolding appears to be the way for-
ward [36]. However, there is a lack of helpful and clear terminology
to discuss the kinds of classroom interventions conducted so far.
To this end, our report attempts to distinguish the following use
cases: (1) instructors teaching students about using GenAI tools
in order to write code, and (2) instructors using GenAI tools to
support the teaching of their course via help-seeking bots, code
feedback, assignment creation, etc.

The first category is by far the most extensive. Researchers were
quick to show that GenAI could automatically enhance program-
ming error messages [82], which was followed with two large-scale
replications showing a direct benefit to students [143, 153]. In-
deed, GenAI can provide other kinds of advanced and customized
help and qualitative feedback to students working on comput-
ing assignments [10, 11, 67, 81, 89, 94]. Other more recent work,

such as the Harvard CS50 course, has focused on providing pro-
gramming tutoring and help to students at scale through TA chat-
bots [87]. Researchers are only beginning to define how these
should be designed, implemented, and evaluated [35]. The same
applies to understanding how students actually use GenAI in au-
thentic course settings, for example, in introductory programming
courses [69, 128, 129], and advanced computing courses [42].

Instructors can also use GenAI to create customized and unique
assignments tailored to student interests [88, 124] as well as gener-
ate other educational content [38, 138, 146]. Yet, this second cate-
gory of GenAI usage in instruction is the least studied to date, possi-
bly because many instructors have not yet thoughtfully integrated
GenAI directly into their programming instruction [39, 45, 151].
However, studies thus far are showing mixed results. Some are
pointing to its introduction as a way to equip students to move
faster through the curriculum than was ever possible before [148].
Others are claiming that using GenAI has no negative effects on
student learning outcomes [159]. However, some early work when
GitHub Copilot was first released showed that students would flail
and wander during programming tasks due to that tool’s constant
interruptions [114]. Other more recent work has now shown that
GenAI can significantly undercut student critical thinking during
code writing and debugging tasks for those students who over-rely
on it, decreasing their grades overall [56]. Similarly, in an observa-
tional study, researchers found that although a larger percentage
of students are able to complete programming tasks with the aid of
GenAI tools, students faced new metacognitive challenges [113].

As evidenced by the discussion above and our systematic litera-
ture review below, the literature on GenAI in computing education
is expanding rapidly. With so much happening so quickly, it is diffi-
cult to know what has been done, why it is being done, what works,
and where this is all headed. We therefore attempt to capture the
zeitgeist of the present moment in computing history by defining
terms, ordering and summarizing all of this for the reader.

1.1 Goals
With all of the above in mind, this report addresses the following
overarching research goals:

(1a) How are instructors incorporating GenAI into teaching com-

puting?

(1b) And why are they making these choices?
(2a) How have the expectations towards skills in software devel-

opment changed with the advent of GenAI?

(2b) Which computing competencies are required in the future,

according to teachers and industry professionals?

We address these overarching goals via several fine-grained
research questions, and various methods: a systematic literature
review, a survey study with educators and software developers
in industry, and qualitative interviews with computing educators,
computing researchers, and GenAI tool creators.

1.2 Contributions
This working group report describes how and why computing in-
structors have chosen to integrate (or not integrate) GenAI into their
courses, and what they expect with regard to future developments

Beyond the Hype

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

in curricula and industry usage of GenAI tools. We identify the
current state-of-the-art by presenting the following deliverables:

(1) Systematic Literature Review (Section 2 and 3): We review
the existing literature on GenAI tools in computing education
(through May 23, 2024) and present the studies in which educa-
tors report on (a) evidence of GenAI in computing education
research, (b) educators using GenAI tools in their teaching prac-
tices, and (c) the rationale of educators to incorporate GenAI
tools in a certain way.

(2) Evaluating Instructional Practices to Teach Students How
to Use GenAI Tools (Section 4 and 5): We gather current inte-
gration practices through an international survey of computing
instructors. The survey also focused on the tools, policies, moti-
vational aspects, and the impact of GenAI on the competencies
students require to succeed – from an educator’s perspective.
(3) Evaluating Instructors’ Use of GenAI Tools (Section 4 and
5): The survey of educators also revealed the use of GenAI
tools by these educators, for example, to create tools that would
support students.

(4) Evaluating Instructors’ Perspectives on Learning Out-
comes and Future Developments (Section 4 and 5): To
capture the impact of GenAI tools on actual student outcomes,
we conducted semi-structured interviews with instructors. The
results reveal the disruptive character of GenAI tools in terms
of the potential benefits and limitations of GenAI in computing
education.

(5) Exploring the Industry’s Experience (Section 4 and 5):
Another contribution of this report is the integration of the
industry perspective, their experiences and usage patterns of
GenAI tools. This encompasses policies, motivations, and ex-
pectations regarding the competencies future developers will
need.

1.3 Structure of the Report
The structure of this working group report is as follows. To address
related work, the authors present the systematic search and review
of prior studies on how and why computing educators have inte-
grated GenAI tools into their teaching practices. The methods of
the literature review are presented in Section 2 and the respective
results of the systematic literature review are presented in Section 3.
The second major component of this working group report cap-
tures the perspective of both educators and software developers.
We do so by presenting our methodology (Section 4), consisting of
an international survey of computing educators, a series of qualita-
tive interviews with computing educators, and an aligned survey
of software developers to gather current industry practices and
perspectives. As a part of the methodology, we briefly introduce
prior work, fine-grained research questions, the process of devel-
oping the survey and interview questions, and the data analysis
approaches we applied.

We present the results of our mixed-methods approach (i. e., sur-
veys with educators and developers, and interviews with educators)
in Section 5 by triangulating the different data sources for every
research question. In Section 6, we discuss the most interesting
results, and how they build and extend prior work.

In Section 7, we summarize the threats to validity of the ap-
plied methodology, before concluding our work in Section 8, and
presenting pathways for future work (Section 9).

2 Systematic Literature Review: Methods
The systematic literature review (SLR) aims to identify how instruc-
tors are integrating generative AI into computing classrooms. The
goal is to extend the many prior interview and survey studies that
have looked at students’ perceptions of how generative AI tools are
used [7, 49, 80, 161] to focus instead on what is actually being done
within classroom settings. Therefore the goal is to focus on pedago-
gies, tools, and classroom interventions that feature empirical data
about students’ experiences with those classroom interventions.
Specifically, we investigate the following three research questions:

SLR-RQ1. How can the reported evidence of Generative AI in
CER be summarized?
SLR-RQ2. How is generative AI being incorporated into teach-
ing?
SLR-RQ3. What are the motivations behind incorporating GenAI
tools into teaching?

SLR-RQ1 and SLR-RQ2 relate to the overarching research goal
(1a), while SLR-RQ3 relates to the overarching research goal (1b).
Figure 1 illustrates the overall process of the whole systematic
literature review. We follow the literature review best practices by
Kitchenham and Brereton [72]. We first searched through various
databases using a search string. Then, we checked for the inclusion
of reference papers that should be found to confirm the quality of
the search string. This was followed up by doing a title/abstract
scan for relevance. After the title/abstract scan, we read the full
papers and started extracting relevant information from them. In
this stage, some papers were still rejected if they did not pass the in-
clusion/exclusion criteria. In the end, we had a set of 71 papers that
passed the criteria and for which we extracted data. The included
papers are listed in Table 1.

2.1 Search String Construction
The research team iteratively constructed a search string aimed at
including papers that matched our research interests according to
four categories: 1) the domain of the work was computer science
or computer engineering education, 2) the topic was related to the
use of Generative AI (GenAI), 3) it aligned with the working group
focus on the impact of GenAI on pedagogy or teaching tools, and
4) it included the use of empirical methods. The literature review
team met several times to discuss various keyword permutations
and ultimately arrived at the following sub-search string for each
of the four categories:

Domain: “Computer science education” OR “Computing educa-
tion” OR “CS education” OR “CSEd” OR “CER” OR “Computing
students” OR “Computing instructors” OR “CS students” OR
“CS instructors” OR “Computer engineering education” OR
“Programming education” OR “Introductory programming”

Topic: “Large language model” OR “Large language models”
OR “LLM” OR “LLMs” OR “Generative AI” OR “ChatGPT” OR
“GPT3” OR “GPT4” OR “Multimodal model” OR “Multimodal

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

James Prather et al.

Table 1: Papers included in the literature review (listed alphabetically by author, grouped by publication year).
Venue shows the status at the time when the article was included.

AUTHOR
Jonsson and Tholander

TITLE
Cracking the code: Co-coding with AI in creative programming education

Crandall et al.
Denny et al.
Denny et al.
Dos Santos and Cury
Hajj and Sah
Hu et al.
Karnalim et al.
Kazemitabaar et al.
Kumar et al.
Kuramitsu et al.
Liffiton et al.
MacNeil et al.
Markel et al.
Perry et al.
Prasad et al.
Prather et al.
Qureshi
Sandoval et al.
Shanshan and Sen

Shoufan
Speth et al.
Valový and Buchal-
cevova
Wang et al.
Wu et al.
Yilmaz and Yilmaz

Agarwal et al.
Arora et al.
Balse et al.
Barambones et al.
Bernstein et al.
Cámara et al.
Chen et al.
Choudhuri et al.
Cipriano and Alaves
Cipriano et al.
Denny et al.
Denny et al.
Haindl and Weinberger
Hou et al.
Jacobs and Jaschke
Jeuring et al.
Jin et al.
Jury et al.
Kazemitabaar et al.
Kimmel et al.
Kosar et al.
Kuramitsu et al.

Liao et al.
Liu et al.
Lyu et al.
Ma et al.
Manley et al.
Moore et al.
Nam et al.
Neyem et al.
Neyem et al.
Nguyen et al.
Pankiewicz and Baker
Pesovski et al.
Roest et al.
Shah et al.
Sheese et al.
Singh et al.
Sun et al.

Generative Pre-Trained Transformer (GPT) Models as a Code Review Feedback Tool in Computer Science Programs
Can We Trust AI-Generated Educational Content? Comparative Analysis of Human and AI-Generated Learning Resources
Promptly: Using Prompt Problems to Teach Learners How to Effectively Utilize AI Code Generator
Challenging the Confirmation Bias: Using ChatGPT as a Virtual Peer for Peer Instruction in Computer Programming Education
Assessing the Impact of ChatGPT in a PHP Programming Course
Explicitly Introducing ChatGPT into First-year Programming Practice: Challenges and Impact
Plagiarism and AI Assistance Misuse in Web Programming: Unfair Benefits and Characteristics
Studying the effect of AI Code Generators on Supporting Novice Learners in Introductory Programming
Bridging the Gap in AI-Driven Workflows: The Case for Domain-Specific Generative Bots
KOGI: A Seamless Integration of ChatGPT into Jupyter Environments for Programming Education
CodeHelp: Using Large Language Models with Guardrails for Scalable Support in Programming Classes
Experiences from Using Code Explanations Generated by Large Language Models in a Web Software Development E-Book
GPTeach: Interactive TA Training with GPT-based Students
Do Users Write More Insecure Code with AI Assistants?
Generating Programs Trivially: Student Use of Large Language Models
“It’s Weird That it Knows What I Want”: Usability and Interactions with Copilot for Novice Programmers
ChatGPT in Computer Science Curriculum Assessment: An analysis of Its Successes and Shortcomings
Lost at C: A User Study on the Security Implications of Large Language Model Code Assistants
Empowering learners with AI-generated content for programming learning and computational thinking: The lens of extended effective use
theory
Can Students without Prior Knowledge Use ChatGPT to Answer Test Questions? An Empirical Study
Investigating the Use of AI-Generated Exercises for Beginner and Intermediate Programming Courses: A ChatGPT Case Study
The Psychological Effects of AI-Assisted Programming on Students and Professionals

Unleashing ChatGPT’s Power: A Case Study on Optimizing Information Retrieval in Flipped Classrooms via Prompt Engineering
Research on the Construction of Intelligent Programming Platform Based on AI-generated Content
The effect of generative artificial intelligence (AI)-based tool use on students’ computational thinking skills, programming self-efficacy and
motivation

Which LLM should I use?: Evaluating LLMs for tasks performed by Undergraduate Computer Science Students"
Analyzing LLM Usage in an Advanced Computing Class in India
Evaluating the Quality of LLM-Generated Explanations for Logical Errors in CS1 Student Programs
ChatGPT for Learning HCI Techniques: A Case Study on Interviews for Personas
“Like a Nesting Doll”: Analyzing Recursion Analogies Generated by CS Students using Large Language Models"
Generative AI in the Software Modeling Classroom: An Experience Report with ChatGPT and UML
Learning Agent-based Modeling with LLM Companions: Experiences of Novices and Experts Using ChatGPT & NetLogo Chat
How Far Are We? The Triumphs and Trials of Generative AI in Learning Software Engineering
“ChatGPT Is Here to Help, Not to Replace Anybody” – An Evaluation of Students’ Opinions On Integrating ChatGPT In CS Courses
A Picture Is Worth a Thousand Words: Exploring Diagram and Video-Based OOP Exercises to Counter LLM Over-Reliance
Explaining Code with a Purpose: An Integrated Approach for Developing Code Comprehension and Prompting Skills
Prompt Problems: A New Programming Exercise for the Generative AI Era
Students’ Experiences of Using ChatGPT in an Undergraduate Programming Course
CodeTailor: Personalized Parsons Puzzles are Preferred Over AI-Generated Solutions to Support Learning
Evaluating the Application of Large Language Models to Generate Feedback in Programming Education
What Skills Do You Need When Developing Software Using ChatGPT? (Discussion Paper)
Teach AI How to Code: Using Large Language Models as Teachable Agents for Programming Education
Evaluating LLM-generated Worked Examples in an Introductory Programming Course
CodeAid: Evaluating a Classroom Deployment of an LLM-based Programming Assistant that Balances Student and Educator Needs
Enhancing Programming Error Messages in Real Time with Generative AI
Computer Science Education in ChatGPT Era: Experiences from an Experiment in a Programming Course for Novice Programmers
Training AI Model that Suggests Python Code from Student Requests in Natural Language

Scaffolding Computational Thinking with ChatGPT
Teaching CS50 with AI: Leveraging Generative Artificial Intelligence in Computer Science Education
Evaluating the Effectiveness of LLMs in Introductory Computer Science Education: A Semester-Long Field Study
Enhancing Programming Education with ChatGPT: A Case Study on Student Perceptions and Interactions in a Python Course
Examining Student Use of AI in CS1 and CS2
Teaching artificial intelligence in extracurricular contexts through narrative-based learnersourcing
Using an LLM to Help With Code Understanding
Exploring the Impact of Generative AI for StandUp Report Recommendations in Software Capstone Project Development
Toward an AI Knowledge Assistant for Context-aware Learning Experiences in Software Capstone Project Development
How Beginning Programmers and Code LLMs (Mis)read Each Other
Navigating Compiler Errors with AI Assistance – A Study of GPT Hints in an Introductory Programming Course
Generative AI for Customizable Learning Experiences
Next-Step Hint Generation for Introductory Programming Using Large Language Models
Working with Large Code Bases: A Cognitive Apprenticeship Approach to Teaching Software Engineering
Patterns of Student Help-Seeking When Using a Large Language Model-Powered Programming Assistant
Bridging Learnersourcing and AI: Exploring the Dynamics of Student-AI Collaborative Feedback Generation
Would ChatGPT-facilitated programming mode impact college students’ programming behaviors, performances, and perceptions? An empirical
study

Tanay et al.
Taylor et al.
Wang et al.
Woodrow et al.
Xiao et al.
Zhang et al.

An Exploratory Study on Upper-Level Computing Students’ Use of Large Language Models as Tools in a Semester-Long Project
dcc --help: Transforming the Role of the Compiler by Generating Context-Aware Error Explanations with Large Language Models
A Large Scale RCT on Effective Error Messages in CS1
AI Teaches the Art of Elegant Coding: Timely, Fair, and Helpful Style Feedback in a Global Course
Exploring How Multiple Levels of GPT-Generated Programming Hints Support or Disappoint Novices
Students’ Perceptions and Preferences of Generative Artificial Intelligence Feedback for Programming

VENUE
C&C

JCSC
arXiv
arXiv
FIE
ISAS
TALE
TALE
CHI
BigData
SPLASH-E
Koli Calling
SIGCSE TS
L@S
CCS
CompEd
TOCHI
ICSLT
USENIX Security
JCAL

ACM TOCE
CSEE&T
ICSME

IEEE TLT
ICETC
Computers and Educa-
tion: Artificial
Intelli-
gence

arXiv
arXiv
arXiv
IEEE TLT
arXiv
IEEE Software
CHI
ICSE
arXiv
arXiv
arXiv
SIGCSE TS
IEEE Access
arXiv
arXiv
Koli Calling
CHI
ACE
CHI
CHI EA
Mathematics
Journal of Information
Processing
IEEE TLT
SIGCSE TS
arXiv
arXiv
JCSC
CHI
ICSE
SIGCSE TS
IEEE TLT
CHI
arXiv
Sustainability
ACE
SIGCSE TS
ACE
LAK
Jour-
International
nal
Educational
of
Technology in Higher
Education
arXiv
SIGCSE TS
SIGCSE TS
SIGCSE TS
CHI EA
AAAI

YEAR
2022

CITE
[55]

2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023

2023
2023
2023

2023
2023
2023

2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024

2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024

2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024

[29]
[32]
[33]
[123]
[3]
[51]
[58]
[59]
[76]
[78]
[86]
[94]
[96]
[107]
[110]
[114]
[115]
[122]
[131]

[134]
[137]
[149]

[152]
[157]
[160]

[2]
[9]
[12]
[13]
[19]
[30]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[31]
[34]
[46]
[50]
[52]
[53]
[54]
[57]
[60]
[71]
[73]
[77]

[85]
[87]
[90]
[91]
[95]
[97]
[100]
[102]
[101]
[103]
[106]
[108]
[120]
[130]
[133]
[136]
[139]

[140]
[143]
[153]
[156]
[158]
[162]

Beyond the Hype

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

Keyword Search
Scopus, IEEE Explore,
ACM DL, ASEE Peer

1536

Filter: Phase 1 & 2
Title & abstract with
two reviewers per paper.

169

Extraction + Filter
Data was extracted
from each paper plus a
final round of filtering.

71

Final Paper Set
A final set of 71 papers
were included.

Figure 1: The literature review collection and analysis pipeline.

models” OR “Gemini” OR “Claude” OR “GenAI” OR “GPT-
4” OR “GPT-3.5” OR “GPT-3” OR “Copilot” OR “Language
model” OR “Language models” OR “Generative pre-trained
transformer”

Working Group Focus: “Pedagogy” OR “Pedagogies” OR
“Classroom” OR “Student” OR “Students” OR “Teaching ap-
proach” OR “Teaching tools”

Method: “Qualitative” OR “Quantitative” OR “Perceptions” OR
“Investigating” OR “Exploratory” OR “Survey” OR “Interview”
OR “Experiment” OR “Focus group”
The full search string was constructed by combining each of
these categories to ensure a paper contained at least one search
term per category. As such, the full search string is as follows:

Search String = Domain AND Topic AND Working
Group Focus AND Method

We decided to look for papers in a total of five different databases
to ensure comprehensive coverage of work. The chosen databases
were ASEE Peer, arXiv, Scopus, ACM Digital Library, and IEEE
Xplore.

The final search resulted in 1536 papers after duplicate removals.
The search was done on May 23rd, 2024, which is the cut-off date
for included articles. The breakdown of the number of papers from
each database prior to the removals is included in Table 2.

Table 2: The number of papers extracted from each database
prior to duplicate removal.

Source
ASEE Peer
arXiv
Scopus
ACM Digital Library
IEEE Xplore

#
23
47
665
721
258

To ensure that no relevant work was missed in our SLR, we
broadly sampled the literature. To evaluate our search string for
such comprehensive coverage, we selected ten papers that we would
expect to find with our search string, shown in Table 3. All ten
papers were found with the final search string, which provides
evidence that the search string is adequate for finding relevant
papers.

2.2 Paper Filtering Process
Balancing the need to broadly include relevant papers while ensur-
ing the central goals of the research remain in focus is a common
challenge in SLRs. To address this, we developed exclusion criteria
that were applied repeatedly throughout the filtering process, ensur-
ing that only high-quality papers focusing on the use of generative
AI in pedagogical practice were included in our final analysis.

A primary criterion for inclusion in the SLR was that the papers
prominently featured some form of generative AI. This included
studies where students used existing generative AI tools or where
such tools were integrated into pedagogical practices. Papers that
focused on teaching students about generative AI or its associated
ethical aspects were also included.

We included only papers that focused on computing education
at the tertiary level. Papers must have featured student participants
of some kind and could not focus solely on K-12 or professional
developers. However, papers that featured both tertiary students
and K-12 or professional developers were included. The reason to
focus on tertiary students was that these students are being trained
to become computing professionals in the near future.

In keeping with the goal of evaluating robust interventions
within computing education, we excluded shorter papers, such as
posters, demos, and other shorter formats. Since the typical length
of papers in the field of computing education is six pages or more
in a double-column format, we used this lower limit to exclude less
comprehensive studies.

Based on these goals, we applied the following exclusion criteria

at each stage of the filtering process:

(1) Not GenAI: Papers that did not include a generative AI
component were excluded. Papers that simply provide im-
plications for generative AI were also not included.

(2) Not Computing Education: Papers that were not related
to computing education were excluded. For example, papers
primarily focused on professional developers were excluded.
(3) No Human Evidence: The paper did not contain empirical

data or included only an expert evaluation.

(4) No Intervention: Papers that did not feature a classroom
intervention were excluded. However, user studies with stu-
dents were included.

(5) Exclusively K-12: Papers where the participants were ex-

clusively K-12 were excluded.

(6) Too Short: Papers were excluded if they were under 5 pages
for double-column articles and under 8 pages for single-
column articles.

(7) Not an Article: We excluded conference proceedings’ front
matters, white papers, or other non-research content.

In the first phase, we had two reviewers evaluate the title and
abstract of the paper for inclusion. If either of the reviewers thought
that the paper was relevant, it was chosen for the next stage –
extraction.

2.3 Extraction
For all the papers that were not excluded in the title/abstract scan-
ning phase, we thoroughly read the full paper. A paper could still
be rejected at this stage if it did not pass the inclusion/exclusion
criteria. To consistently systematically extract the content from

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

James Prather et al.

(a) Authors locations

(b) Students population locations

Figure 2: Heatmaps of where authors publishing are located (Figure 2a) and where the student populations they are investigating
are located (Figure 2b)

Table 3: The reference papers used to evaluate the quality of the search string.

Paper title

Citation

Teaching CS50 with AI: Leveraging Generative Artificial Intelligence in Computer Science Education
Prompt Problems: A New Programming Exercise for the Generative AI Era
CodeHelp: Using Large Language Models with Guardrails for Scalable Support in Programming Classes
Experiences from Using Code Explanations Generated by Large Language Models in a Web Software Development
E-Book
Evaluating LLM-generated Worked Examples in an Introductory Programming Course
Next-Step Hint Generation for Introductory Programming Using Large Language Models
ChatGPT for Learning HCI Techniques: A Case Study on Interviews for Personas
CodeAid: Evaluating a Classroom Deployment of an LLM-based Programming Assistant that Balances Student and
Educator Needs
“ChatGPT Is Here to Help, Not to Replace Anybody” – An Evaluation of Students’ Opinions On Integrating ChatGPT
In CS Courses
Explaining Code with a Purpose: An Integrated Approach for Developing Code Comprehension and Prompting Skills

[87]
[34]
[86]
[94]

[57]
[120]
[13]
[60]

[26]

[31]

each paper, we developed a structured form shown in Appendix F
to extract information for all papers that were included in the re-
view. Four researchers extracted the content from the final set of
71 papers.

Course Information. A variety of courses were used to study AI
tools. We saw 26 upper division courses including three masters’
level courses. CS1 was studied in 20 papers. Eight papers included
more than one course. Examples of other courses were Human
Computer Interaction, Software Modeling, and Embedded Systems.

3 Systematic Literature Review: Results
In this section, we present the results of the systematic literature
review. They are based on the information extracted from the final
set of 71 papers that resulted from the process described in the
previous section.

3.1 Descriptive Statistics
From the evaluation form we collected a variety of descriptive data
that relates to: 1) the authors and the students they evaluated, 2)
the characteristics of the studies they conducted, 3) the types of
courses in which these studies took place, and 4) the custom tools
that have been developed.

Author and Student Information. As shown in Figure 2a, the
locations of the authors’ institutions varied widely with the largest
proportion of articles having authors from the United States (34 %)
and New Zealand (14 %). Additionally, they were primarily from
academic institutions (n=67) with very few coming from industry
or involving industry-academic collaborations (n=2), or just from
industry (n=1). As might be expected, the majority of studies took
place at one or more of the authors’ institutions which results in the
distribution of student populations that were investigated looking
quite similar to the one for authors (Figure 2b).

51015202530USANew ZealandChinaIndiaIrelandCanadaFinlandJapanAustraliaPortugalTurkeyThe NetherlandsGermanyChileSpainSouth KoreaUAEBrazilNorth MacedoniaSwedenSloveniaSaudi ArabiaPolandAustriaKoreaCzech Republic0.00.2Frequency2.55.07.510.012.515.017.520.0USANew ZealandIndiaChinaJapanSpainUnclearThe NetherlandsChileTurkeyPortugalSloveniaBrazilSaudi ArabiaUAENorth MacedoniaSwedenAustraliaFinlandGermanyPolandAustriaKoreaCzech Republic0.00.2FrequencyBeyond the Hype

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

Table 4: Characteristics of the studies and their methods.

Methodology
Both
Quantitative
Qualitative

(a) Methodologies Used

Study Type
Unsupervised study
Supervised study
Both
Unclear

(b) Level of Supervision

#
36
25
9

#
41
24
2
3

Figure 3: The programming languages reported on by the
studies.

Figure 4: Quality of work as evaluated using the paper quality
metrics of Hellas et al. [47].

Study Context and Quality. The majority of the evaluations used
a mixed methods approach, followed by quantitative methods (Ta-
ble 4a). With respect to the student populations under investigation
both mixed-methods (median=52.0 IQR=(24.0-105.0)) and quanti-
tative (median=56.0 IQR=(49.0-160.0)) studies investigated student
populations of similar sizes. Purely qualitative studies, as might be
expected, had the smallest number of participants (median=21.0
IQR=(12.0-72.0)). Additionally, the majority of studies conducted
were done in an unsupervised (i. e., uninvigilated) manner (Ta-
ble 4b) and Python was by far the most common language being
used (Figure 3).

Using the quality metrics presented by Hellas et al. [47], we
evaluated each paper according to its presentation of: 1) addressed
limitations, 2) descriptions of the presented results, 3) description of
the research process, and 4) presentation of the research questions.
Overall, we find the majority of the empirical work we evaluated
were sufficient across all four of these dimensions (Figure 4). The
dimension that saw the largest degree of vagueness (20 %) or exclu-
sion (11 %) was that of clearly defined limitations.

Custom Tools. In the course of our literature review we uncov-
ered a wide variety of custom tooling that has been developed
for the support of instructors and students alike. These included:
CodeAid [60], CodeHelp [86, 133], WorkedGen [57], LLM Hint Fac-
tory [158], Tutor Kai [52], CodeTutor [90], GPTeach [96], Charlie the
Coding Cow [103], KOGI [78], NetLogo Chat [24], Promptly [33, 34],
IPSSC [85], CS50 Duck [87], Gilt [100], CodeTailor [50], and a vari-
ety of others that lacked names [76, 97, 101, 156].

Using Generative AI for Teaching vs Teaching Students to Use
Generative AI. In relation to the research goals of the group, we
categorized the literature into two broader categories: studies where
generative AI was used for some pedagogical purpose and studies
where the main goal was to teach students about generative AI
specifically or to use a specific generative AI tool. Of the papers
reviewed, 57 fell into the use category and the remaining 14 were
categorized as teach.

3.2 How Is Generative AI Being Incorporated

into Teaching?

In the extraction form, we had an open-ended question on “How
Instructors Incorporate Generative AI into Teaching Computing?”,
which directly maps to our SLR-RQ2.

To analyze the results for this question, three authors themati-
cally analyzed the open-ended responses and came up with initial
tags. They discussed the initial tags and then combined them into
definitive tags along three axes: tool type, purpose from the stu-
dent’s point of view, and whether students received guidance on
how to use generative AI.

Our tags for each axis are below.

• Tool type: general purpose (e. g., ChatGPT), task-specific
(e. g., GitHub Copilot), instructor-provided guardrails (e. g.,
CodeHelp [86], Promptly [33], CodeAid [60], CodeTailor [50]).
• Purpose: hints, debug, learning resources, writing code, teacher
training, code comprehension, code review, teach GenAI, mo-
tivation, UML, multiple, not specified.
• Guidance on GenAI use: yes, no, unclear.

For tool type, we categorized tools as general purpose (such as
ChatGPT), whether the tool is task-specific (i. e., the tool is meant for
a specific task, but not education-focused, such as GitHub Copilot),
and whether there are instructor-provided guardrails (i. e., there
were pedagogical guardrails or other constraints in the tool).

For purpose from the student’s point of view, we looked at the
tasks that students worked on with the support of GenAI. During
the thematic analysis, we came up with the following categories.
• Writing code – GenAI was used for code writing support.
For example, CodeTailor helps students write code and in-
teract with Parsons problems [50].

051015202530SQLForgeUnified Modeling Language (UML)NetLogoTypeScriptPHPNot statedC#JSC++Not programming language focusedUnclearCJavaPython0.00.20.40.60.81.0Is there a clearly defined researchquestion/hypothesis?Is the research process clearlydescribed?Are the results presented withsufficient detail?Are threats to validity /limitations addressed in an explicit(sub)section?NoVague/UnclearYesITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

James Prather et al.

• Code comprehension – GenAI was used to teach code
comprehension. For example, Gilt provides scaffolding con-
textualized to select sections of students’ code [100].

Table 5: The characteristics of studies in terms of (a) their
intended purpose, (b) the type of the tool, and (c) guidance
provided on how to use GenAI.

• Hints – GenAI was used to produce hints for students. For

example, next-step hints [120].

• Learning resources – GenAI was used to create or improve
learning resources that could be used by other students too.
For example, students were instructed to generate analogies
using LLMs [19].

• Teach generative AI – the article describes an approach
or tool to teach students how to use GenAI. For example,
Promptly provides scaffolding for students to learn how to
prompt GenAI [33].

• Multiple tags – GenAI was used for multiple purposes.
For example, Choudhuri et al. investigated students’ use of
GenAI for multiple different software engineering tasks such
as debugging and refactoring [25].

• Debug – GenAI was used for debugging help, such as by

explaining error messages [131].

• Code review – GenAI was used for code review. For ex-
ample, by integrating it into an assignment submission sys-
tem [29].

• UML – GenAI was used to assist in generating UML dia-

grams. This was done by Cámara et al. [30].

• Teacher training – GenAI was used for teacher or teaching
assistant training. GPTeach creates LLM agents that act as
students to train new TAs [96].

• Motivation – GenAI was used to increase student moti-
vation. This was done by Moore et al. in a narrative-based
learnersourcing platform [97].

• Not specified – the purpose of GenAI was not specified in

the paper or was unclear.

For guidance on GenAI use, we categorized each paper as a
“yes”, ‘no”, or “unclear” (i. e., whether students received guidance or
instructions on how to use generative AI).

The results of this analysis are presented in Table 5. Based on the
findings, most studies focused on using generative AI for writing
code, code comprehension, hints, and generating learning resources.
Slightly under half (32/71) of the studies used tools with instructor-
provided guardrails, for example, a custom tool with pedagogical
guardrails. However, most commonly (34/71), studies used a general
purpose generative AI tool such as ChatGPT. In the majority of
studies (49/70), it was not reported that students would have been
instructed on how to use generative AI.

We also looked at the type of evidence used, categorizing it into
perceptual (e. g., opinions of activity) or behavioral (e. g., correctness
of produced code). This was contrasted with the nature of the
findings, which were categorized as positive, negative, mixed, or
neutral. The results of this analysis are presented in Table 6. The
results suggest that the majority of studies found positive results,
with studies using behavioral evidence slightly more likely to report
positive findings. 54 % of studies with perceptual evidence reported
positive findings whereas 69 % of studies with behavioral and 70 %
of studies with both types of evidence reported positive findings.

Task
writing code
code comprehension
hints
learning resources
teach GenAI
multiple
debug
code review
UML
teacher training
motivation
not specified

#
26
10
8
7
6
5
2
2
1
1
1
2

(a) Intended Purpose

Response
general purpose
instructor
guardrails
task-specific
unclear

Count
34
32

4
1

(b) Tool Type

Response
no
yes
unclear

Count
49
21
1

(c) Guidance on GenAI Use

Table 6: Type of evidence versus nature of findings. Note that
one study had positive findings, but unclear type of evidence,
leading to the numbers only summing to 70.

Positive Negative Mixed Neutral Total

Perceptual
Behavioral
Both

Total

13
11
21

45

1
1
3

5

9
1
5

15

1
3
1

5

24
16
30

70

3.3 What Are the Motivations Behind

Incorporating GenAI Tools into Teaching?

In the extraction form, we had an open-ended question on “And why
do they incorporate GenAI tools that way?”, which directly maps to
our SLR-RQ3. In the previous section, we outlined how instructors
are incorporating generative AI into their teaching. Part of the why
is overlapping – the ways it is incorporated often tell about the why.
Thus, we here focus on in benefit of whom it is being integrated. We
tagged each of the included papers with “students”, “instructors”
or “both”. Out of the 71 papers, in 59 GenAI was incorporated in
benefit of students. In 5 papers it was in benefit of teachers. In 7
papers it was in benefit of both students and teachers.

3.4 Recommendations for Incorporating GenAI
To analyze the effectiveness of incorporating generative AI into
computing classrooms, we cross-tabulated the type of tool and
guidance on GenAI use provided to students with the nature of the
findings (positive, negative, mixed or neutral). The results of this
analysis are reported in Table 7. The main result that can be seen
from the table is that when there is no guidance on using GenAI
from the instructor, it is recommended to use a tool that includes
instructor-provided guardrails, e. g., pedagogical guardrails. When
students are not provided guidance and use a general purpose
generative AI model (e. g., ChatGPT), only 55 % (12/22) of studies

Beyond the Hype

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

Table 7: Comparing the types of tools and level of guidance provided.

Guidance Tool type

Positive Negative Mixed Neutral Total

no
no
no

yes
yes
yes

general
task-specific
guardrailed

general
task-specific
guardrailed

12
1
19

7
2
4

3

1

1

4

5

4
1
1

3

2

22
1
26

12
3
6

Table 8: Comparing outcomes based on the task type.

Positive Negative Mixed Neutral Total

Writing code
Code comprehension
Hints
Learning resources
Teach GenAI
Multiple
Debug
Code review
UML
Teacher training
Motivation
Not specified

Total

15
8
4
6
4
2
1
2
1
1
1
1

46

2
1

1
1

5

8
1
2
1
1
2

15

1

2

1

1

5

26
10
8
7
6
5
2
2
1
1
1
2

71

found positive results. However, even without guidance, if the tool
included instructor-provided guardrails, positive results were found
in 73 % (19/26) of studies. When students are given instructions on
how to use generative AI, whether the tool has built-in pedagogical
guardrails does not seem to matter as much – studies that used
general purpose tools found positive results in 58 % (7/12) of cases
and studies that used instructor-guardrailed tools found positive
results in 67 % (4/6) of cases.

In a similar vein, we cross-tabulated the nature of the findings
with the task that GenAI was used for to examine what computing
education tasks might benefit most from generative AI. The results
of this analysis are reported in Table 8. There are differences be-
tween tasks in whether findings of the studies have been positive or
not. For code writing, 58 % (15/26) studies reported positive results,
whereas for code comprehension, 80 % (8/10) of studies reported
positive results. According to our results, hint generation is an area
where generative AI could still improve, since only half of the stud-
ies (4/8) reported positive results. Better results have been observed
for generating learning resources, where 86 % (6/7) studies found
positive results.

4 Educator and Developer Views: A

Mixed-Methods Approach

Computing educators want to prepare students for a successful
career in software development. It is thus important to understand
the experiences of software developers in addition to educators’
perspectives to evaluate how different the two perspectives are. For

this reason, we conducted a survey study with both target groups,
and an interview study with educators.

Through the educator survey study, we aimed to gather a large
sample of educator perspectives on whether (and how) they incor-
porate GenAI in their classroom, their motivations for this decision,
and how they see competencies changing for programming edu-
cation. We also surveyed developers to build a landscape of how
GenAI tools are currently being used in industry settings and how
developers view the changing competencies required for program-
ming. The larger sample size of the survey also allows us to begin
to explore equity-related questions related to student access and
exposure to GenAI tools.

Through the interview study, we aimed to gather first-hand ac-
counts, and deeper insights from educators on changes to their
classroom as a result of emerging GenAI tools. We interviewed ed-
ucators who teach students how to use GenAI tools to engage with
class materials as well as how to use such tools in their professional
careers. We also included educators who took a deliberate (explicit)
stand to disallow the use of GenAI tools in their classes. Further, we
interviewed developers of LLM-powered educational tools as well
as researchers focused on the use of GenAI in computing education.
In this section, we first summarize prior studies that similarly
gathered perspectives of educators and developers. Then we present
the ten research questions that we answer through both the surveys
and interviews. Next, we describe the applied methodology.

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

James Prather et al.

4.1 Prior Studies of Educators’ and Developers’

Perceptions

Computing educators’ perspectives on GenAI tools have been re-
ported in several prior studies. For example, Chan and Lee [23]
surveyed 184 educators and 399 students, primarily from Hong
Kong but across different disciplines. They focused on the per-
ceptions, experience, and knowledge about GenAI, and compared
educator and student responses. They found that the educators
seemed more concerned about students’ over-reliance and ethical
issues and were skeptical towards GenAI tools and their capabilities.
The need for policies and guidelines ensuring academic integrity
and equitable learning conditions was yet another outcome [23].

Amani et al. [5] also investigated students’ and instructors’ per-
ceptions towards GenAI through two surveys at Texas A&M uni-
versity. The goal of the instructor survey was to capture how GenAI
affected their recent courses and how they think students should
use respective tools. One important finding is that the responses
from 243 staff members emphasize the need for teaching practices
to adapt [5]. Another survey of educators was conducted by Prather
et al. [111]. The 57 respondents elaborated on their perceptions, ex-
perience, usage, course policies, expectations, and beliefs, indicating
that educators should stay abreast of the technological develop-
ments. The results also highlight the need to provide guidance for
students regarding the ethical use of GenAI.

In addition to these surveys, a number of recent research studies
used interviews to gather the instructor perspective on the impact
of GenAI on Computing education research and practice [80, 111,
118, 132, 154, 161]. For example, Lau and Guo conducted interviews
with 20 instructors about their intentions to adapt their teaching
to emerging GenAI tools (e. g., ChatGPT and Copilot) [80]. Wang
et al. [154] also interviewed 11 instructors about their perceptions.
Despite sharing concerns about over-reliance and misuse of GenAI
tools, the instructors did not have plans to adapt their courses due
to the lack of effective strategies at the time. Another example
is the interview study with 40 instructors by Rajabi et al. [118],
which showed that educators were cautious about banning AI tools,
because students would find ways of using them regardless. At the
same time, instructors seemed concerned about increasing anxiety
among students by focusing too heavily on exams, which is a well-
known issue [64, 79, 92]. A recent interview study with educators
was conducted by Sheard et al. [132]. They focused on educators’
current practices, concerns, and planned adaptations relating to
these tools. They found, for example, that educators appreciate
that the tools can be a source of support for students, but that
these tools may lead to students missing out on learning. Finally,
Zastudil et al. [161] conducted an interview study comparing the
perspectives of 6 instructors and 12 students, finding alignment
in their concerns about over-reliance and misalignment in their
motivations and relative knowledge about generative AI.

While there has been some work in studying how developers
can use GenAI tools to enhance their workflow, little has been done
to understand the perceptions of how software developers see the
practice changing. Specifically, one study found that software de-
velopers are using GenAI tools at many points in the programming
process, including creating, modifying, debugging, and explaining

code [15]. Recent work reports that GenAI automated code gener-
ation increases developer productivity [83], and GenAI tools are
particularly useful for assisting in resolving technical issues [28].
Typically, productivity is measured in terms of the acceptance rates
of coding suggestions [163].

In summary, we identified several survey and interview studies
about the perceptions of educators regarding the prospective adop-
tion of courses, learning objectives, assessments, or institutional
policies, but not the actual adoption. Moreover, we found fewer
studies focused on developers. In our survey study, we focus on
both instructors and developers, to understand the perspectives
of experts both within the learning environment and within the
industry.

4.2 Research Questions
Based on the overarching research goals (see Section 1), the system-
atic literature review, and the identified gap on actual integration
practices in education and industry, we constructed the following
research questions guiding our work:
RQ1 Policies: What are the existing policies and practices around

using GenAI in Computing courses? (1b)

RQ2 Instruction-use: How are instructors teaching students
about using GenAI tools in order to program? (1a)
RQ3 Instruction-support: How are instructors using generative
AI tools to support the teaching of their courses? (1a)
RQ4 Motivations: Why are instructors making these choices

around using GenAI? (1b)

RQ5 Tools: What kinds of GenAI tools are emerging in Comput-

ing education? (1a)

RQ6 Perceived Outcomes: How has GenAI impacted instructor
perceptions of student outcomes (compared to before)? (2a)
RQ7 Industry usage: How are industry developers using GenAI

tools? (2a)

RQ8 Competencies: How has GenAI impacted desired student

competencies? (2a, 2b)

RQ9 Equity: How has GenAI impacted student equity? (1a, 1b,

2b)

RQ10 Future: How is GenAI shaping the future of Computing

education? (2b)

We intentionally divided RQ2 and RQ3 into two distinct research
questions as the Working Group believes it is valuable to empha-
size that GenAI tools are used in the classroom and also impacting
course learning outcomes. Specifically, RQ2 focuses on investigat-
ing how educators prepare students for the future of programming
where GenAI tools are available. This may include instructing them
about GenAI capabilities for programming or allowing GenAI tools
to be used by students as a method to teach students how to ef-
fectively incorporate tools into their workflow. RQ2 is in contrast
to RQ3 which explores how educators incorporate GenAI tools
into the classroom and their workflow. This could include using
GenAI tools for grading, assignment creation, student feedback, or
providing help (like a TA-bot).

4.3 Mixed-Methods
To address the research questions regarding educators’ and software
developers’ viewpoints, we employed a mixed-methods approach.

Beyond the Hype

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

To capture the breadth of GenAI usage and perspectives in comput-
ing education, we conducted two surveys, one targeting educators
and the other targeting developers. To more deeply understand cur-
rent views and potential future uses for GenAI, we carried out an
interview study involving tool creators, educators studying GenAI,
and educators using GenAI.

The subsequent sections describe the design of both the sur-
veys and interview study. Since our studies were structured around
our research questions, we have organized the results section ac-
cordingly. Rather than presenting survey and interview results
separately, we integrate the findings from both methods for each
research question. For clarity, we present the mapping of research
questions and survey questions in Table 9.

4.4 Survey Development
To address our research questions, we developed surveys to quan-
tify the opinions and behaviors of a broad range of CS educators
and professional programmers. Because CS educators have different
responsibilities and may have different perceptions than profes-
sional programmers, we created two separate surveys: an educator
survey and a developer survey.

To design the questionnaires, we collaborated within our group
to draft survey questions for each overarching research question, in-
cluding closed-ended, open-ended, and rating scale question types.
As a part of this process, we reviewed the literature (e. g., [111])
and questions from existing surveys. However, few questions could
be reused due to our focus on the rationale and actual integration
of GenAI tools rather than expectations or anticipated use.

We then reviewed and edited these questions to increase clarity,
relevance, neutrality, and specificity, following best practices from
survey design [74]. When appropriate, questions were shared be-
tween the educator and developer surveys to allow us to compare
responses between the two audiences. As part of our development
process, we also piloted our survey with educators and developers
to increase alignment with our target audiences.

4.4.1 Educator Survey. The educator survey was developed to ad-
dress the two overall goals of the working group, and most of the
research questions mentioned earlier (see Section 4.2 and Table 9 for
the precise mapping of survey questions and research questions).
As the previous year’s working group had surveyed educators [111],
we also drew from their survey questions where possible to facili-
tate potential comparisons. We expected educators to have a wide
variety of views on the topic of GenAI and designed the survey to
be multi-pathed based on their earlier responses. The full survey
comprises 30 questions. It can be found in Appendix A. The pre-
cise mapping of survey questions to research questions is shown
in Table 9.

Prior studies conducted in the very early days of LLMs emer-
gence and general availability necessarily needed to focus on short-
and long-term concerns of stakeholders, as many educators were
unsure of how to proceed. Moreover, educators had broadly taken
one of the two approaches to GenAI: either they do not use GenAI
and disallow students from using it, or they actively include it in
their teaching or at least allow students to use it [80]. There are still
open questions, of course, but now the community has had more
time to process the upheaval and more research to inform their

teaching. As such, our survey shifts to focus on specific reasons,
opportunities, and constraints for why educators and industry pro-
fessionals use or do not use GenAI. To increase specificity and to
capture a diverse range of perspectives, our educator survey also
has separate branches for instructors that allowed or did not allow
their students to use GenAI tools. We are also asking about concrete
teaching approaches and assessments.

We are also particularly interested in the ways that learning to
program, and programming in industry, are changing. To that end,
we have asked several questions around whether educators believe
that programming skills are shifting, how competencies (meaning
knowledge, skills and dispositions in context of a task [117]) have
or have not changed, and which of them may become more or
less relevant. The latter has been subject to discussion ever since
GenAI tools have emerged [16]. Another ongoing concern is around
equitable access to these tools. As such, in our educator survey, we
ask which tools students are expected to use and how they will
access those tools (including whether there is a cost).

4.4.2 Developer Survey. The developer survey was created for
three purposes: (1) to capture an overarching view on how GenAI
tools are being used in professional software development, (2) to
capture developer viewpoints on how the tools are impacting their
workflow, and (3) to capture developer viewpoints on the expected
changes in competencies required to develop software. Another
aspect we are addressing is whether and how developers have ex-
perienced issues regarding ethical concerns, or harm being done
by the use of GenAI tools.

Gathering the developers’ perspectives helps us develop a ground-
ed understanding of how software development is changing in the
field. Moreover, we can compare their viewpoint with the educators’
perspective. This enables a more realistic evaluation of the current
state-of-the-art in industry, which may eventually contribute to
adapting teaching practices and curricula. All 19 questions of the
developer survey are available in Appendix B. It was designed to
address both users and non-users. The mapping of survey questions
to research questions is shown in Table 9.

4.5 Distribution of the Surveys
To recruit instructors, we sent emails to colleagues, public mailing
lists, and private mailing lists. We also asked recipients to forward
the survey links to peers to increase its distribution. We sent emails
that contained recruitment for the educators survey to the following
groups and mailing lists:

• SIG “Computer Science Education” (ACM)
• SIG “Educational Technology” of the German Computer Sci-

ence society

• SIG “Human-Computer-Interaction” of the German Com-

puter Science Society

• Participants at ITiCSE 2024 conference
• Contacts at Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs)
• A Slack group for teaching faculty who are predominantly

in the United States

• Departmental mailing lists of the authors
• Colleagues of the authors
• LinkedIn networks of the authors

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

James Prather et al.

Table 9: Mapping of the research questions (1st column) and respective survey questions (2nd column) in the Educator Survey
(ES) and Developer Survey (DS).

Research Questions

Survey Questions

RQ1: Policies

RQ2: Instruction-use
and RQ3: Instruction-
support

RQ4: Motivations

ES-1: Do you explicitly disallow students to use GenAI tools for all of your computing courses (within the last 12 months)?
ES-2: Are you incorporating GenAI tools (e.g., actively integrating it into the curriculum or exercises) into your recent courses (within the last
12 months)?
ES-10: Are you doing anything to prevent GenAI tools’ use in your course?
ES-11: What are you doing to prevent GenAI tools’ use in your course?
ES-21: Please describe any changes you have made to your teaching approaches in courses you are teaching as a result of GenAI tools.
ES-22: Please describe any changes you have made to your assessment approaches in courses you are teaching as a result of GenAI tools.
DS-14: What is the main reason that you do not use GenAI tools for professional software development?

ES-12: We ask you to think of a recent course (within the last 12 months) that you teach that is most influenced by GenAI tools.
ES-13: Select the size of the recent course that you teach that is most influenced by GenAI tools
ES-14: Who uses (or is expected to use) GenAI tools in your course(s)?
ES-15: If students are allowed to use GenAI tools, how do you expect students to access them?
ES-16: Which type of GenAI tools are you incorporating into your recent course that is most influenced by GenAI tools?
ES-17: In what ways have you incorporated GenAI tools into your recent course that is most influenced by GenAI tools?

ES-9: Why don’t you allow GenAI tools in your courses?
ES-18: Why have you incorporated GenAI tools into your recent course?
ES-20: Why have you not incorporated GenAI tools (e.g., actively integrating it into the curriculum or exercises) into your recent courses
(within the last 12 months)?

RQ5: Tools

ES-16: Which type of GenAI tools are you incorporating into your recent course that is most influenced by GenAI tools?

RQ6: Perceived
Outcomes

RQ7: Industry usage

RQ8: Competencies

Interviews only

ES-7: How often do you believe professional software engineers are using GenAI tools as part of their professional role?
ES-8: For which tasks or contexts are industry professionals using GenAI tools?
DS-1: Do you use GenAI?
DS-2: How often do you use GenAI?
DS-3: What types?
DS-4: Describe how you use them
DS-5: Select the tasks for which you use GenAI
DS-6: How not useful or useful have GenAI tools been to your software development?
DS-7: Have GenAI tools made your software development more or less efficient?
DS-8: How not harmful or harmful have GenAI tools been to your software Development?
DS-9: If you consider GenAI tools harmful, please describe a situation you have experienced, e.g., what were you doing, what did you expect,
why was the use of the GenAI tools harmful and to whom?
DS-14, DS-15: What is the main reason that you do not use GenAI tools for professional software development?

ES-3: Do you believe the skills to create software have changed after the advent of GenAI tools?
ES-4: Please elaborate on your last response why skills have not changed.
ES-5: In what ways do you think the skills needed to create software have changed with the introduction of GenAI tools?
ES-6: When using GenAI tools to create (parts of) software, which skills become the most important (select up to 3)?
ES-19: Have you changed any of the learning objectives of your recent course based on the capabilities of GenAI tools?
DS-10: Did the competencies (i.e., knowledge, skills, dispositions in context of a task) required to professionally develop software change with
the availability of GenAI tools?
DS-11: If you have seen changes, from your experience with GenAI tools, what do you believe are new relevant competencies to professionally
develop software with GenAI tools?
DS-12: If you have seen changes, from your experience with GenAI tools, what do you believe are competencies that are no longer or less
relevant to professionally develop software with GenAI tools?

RQ9: Equity

RQ10: Future

All

ES-26: Do you teach at an institution that serves a minority population in your country?

Interviews only

DS-13, DS-16: What advice would you give to novice programmers regarding the use of GenAI tools?

To recruit developers in industry, we sent emails to personal
contacts, public and private mailing lists. We also asked recipients
to forward the survey links to peers to increase its distribution.
We sent emails with the developer’s survey link to the following
mailing lists and social networks:

• SIG “Human-Computer-Interaction” of the German Com-

puter Science Society

• Personal contacts through online networks (e. g. LinkedIn)
• Miscellaneous company lists
• CS department alumni groups

• SIG “Educational Technology” of the German Computer Sci-

ence society

In addition, the German “Fraunhofer Gesellschaft”, a non-profit
organization for research and development, helped share the survey

Beyond the Hype

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

among their scientific staff and industrial partners. The same applies
to the authors’ network with the Leibniz Association—a connection
of 96 research institutes in Germany.

4.6 Survey Data Analysis
The survey data were analyzed using a mixed-methods approach to
accommodate both closed-ended and open-ended questions. Quan-
titative responses from closed-ended items were processed using
descriptive statistics and statistical data visualizations.

Qualitative data from open-ended questions underwent a the-
matic analysis [144]. Two members of the research team coded
responses, identified recurring themes, and categorized them into
broader conceptual groups. To improve reliability, the two researchers
independently coded a subset of responses, compared their cod-
ing schemes, and resolved discrepancies through discussion until
reaching an agreement.

For the educator survey, we received 209 responses (cutoff date
July 29, 2024). However not all responses were used. We did not
use the responses for which the participants did not agree to the
consent form or which were incomplete (100 responses). In addition,
we had some test data that were also not included (33 responses).
Based on these criteria, we have N = 76 fully complete responses
for the present analysis.

For the developer survey, we received 94 responses (cutoff date
29 July 2024). Again, not all answers were used: we did not use the
responses for which the participants did not agree to the consent
form or which contained no data. Based on these criteria, we ana-
lyze the resulting N = 39 response sequences, 29 of which contain
responses to all survey questions (and are thus fully complete).

4.7 Interviews Method
Before conducting the interviews, we compiled a list of individuals
who fit into one of the following three categories of interest:

• Tool creators: This group comprises faculty, graduate stu-
dents, software developers, and tech leads who design, build,
and refine GenAI systems for educational use. These tools fo-
cus on enhancing coding efficiency, supporting educational
needs, and integration into various computing environments.
Insights from this group provide a critical understanding of
the technical challenges and opportunities associated with
the adoption of LLMs in computing education.

• Educators studying GenAI: Educators studying GenAI
are primarily researchers and academic professionals who
investigate these technologies’ implications, efficacy, and
educational potential. This group includes faculty members,
educational researchers, and curriculum developers who are
exploring how LLMs can be leveraged to enhance learning
outcomes, transform teaching methodologies, and address
the evolving needs of computing education. They examine
the theoretical underpinnings, practical applications, and
ethical considerations of using AI in educational settings.
• Educators using GenAI: Educators using GenAI are in-
structors actively incorporating LLMs into their teaching
practices. This group spans faculty members from computer
science and related disciplines, teaching both majors and

non-majors. These educators use AI tools to facilitate learn-
ing, provide personalized support, and improve the overall
educational experience. They bring practical perspectives
on the benefits and challenges of integrating AI into the
classroom, including its impact on student engagement, as-
sessment, and skill development. Their experiences offer a
practical understanding of how GenAI can be effectively im-
plemented to enhance teaching and learning in computing
education.

The interviewees have been active in the computing education
community in at least one of the areas identified above. The research
team completed 4, 5, and 7 interviews in each of the respective areas
(in the order as listed above), and one interview with a thoughtful
non-user. We additionally interviewed the thoughtful non-user to
obtain broad perspectives.

We used the research questions outlined in Section 4 to pursue
our overall research goals. We used these research questions to
guide our analysis of the transcripts.

Interview Question Development. Developing interview ques-
4.7.1
tions was a collaborative and iterative process involving a team
of four members. This team was responsible for designing a set of
questions associated with each category of individuals being in-
terviewed: tool creators, educators studying GenAI, and educators
using GenAI. The primary aim was to ensure that the questions
would elicit key insights from these individuals while addressing
the main research questions of the study.

Initially, the team drafted a comprehensive list of questions for
each category, focusing on capturing the unique perspectives and
experiences of the interviewees. The questions were designed to
explore various aspects of using LLMs and GenAI in computing ed-
ucation, including their development, implementation, and impact.
Once the initial set of questions was prepared, it was presented
to the larger group of researchers for feedback. During this revision
phase, several modifications were made to refine the questions
further. Modifications include:

• Content Overlap: Some questions were removed due to
redundancy and overlap in content to ensure that each ques-
tion addressed distinct aspects of the research.

• Duration Management: To keep the interviews within a
manageable duration of one hour, certain questions were cut.
This decision was made to respect the interviewees’ time
and maintain the focus and depth of the discussions.

• Improving Quality and Directedness: The wording of
several questions was revised to enhance clarity, specificity,
and directedness. This helped ensure the questions were
straightforward and elicited detailed, relevant responses.
• Adding Follow-Up Questions: To extract more context
and deeper insights, follow-up questions such as “Why?”
and “Can you elaborate more?” were incorporated. These
prompts encouraged interviewees to provide more detailed
explanations and examples.

4.8 Interview Process
The interview process was designed and implemented to gain com-
prehensive insights. To ensure a diverse and representative sample
from each category, we selected individuals for an interview based

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

James Prather et al.

on the results of our literature review, i. e., who is writing about
this topic from the perspectives of educators using GenAI in their
classes or researching GenAI in computing or creating GenAI tools
for computing classrooms. A total of 17 individuals were selected
to interview, with 4, 5, and 7 individuals from each of the previously
identified categories, respectively. The one remaining participant
could be classified as a thoughtful non-user because we felt it impor-
tant to hear from someone who was intentionally and thoughtfully
trying to avoid using it in their computing classroom. These par-
ticipants were invited to participate in one-on-one interviews, and
they accepted and signed the consent form.

4.8.1 Conducting Interviews. A single team member conducted
each interview via Zoom. The scheduling of these interviews en-
sured that each session lasted for no more than one hour to adhere
strictly to the allocated time frame. Using Zoom facilitated a conve-
nient and efficient way to conduct these interviews remotely.

4.8.2 Recording and Transcription. All Zoom sessions were recorded
with participant permission to create accurate transcriptions. To
comply with Institutional Review Board (IRB) protocol require-
ments, these recordings were deleted once the transcriptions were
completed. We used secure transcription services to create the tran-
scripts and cleaned them by removing typographic errors.

Interview Structure. The interview questions were posed to
4.8.3
each interviewee sequentially. It is important to note that these
questions were not shared with the participants prior to the in-
terview. This approach aimed to elicit spontaneous and genuine
responses to provide more authentic and valuable data for the study.

4.9 Interview Data Analysis
This section describes the process used to analyze the interview
transcripts. The analysis was conducted systematically, involving
multiple team members to ensure consistency and reliability.

Initial Review and Consensus Building. Three team members
4.9.1
jointly reviewed one transcript to establish a consistent tagging
methodology. During this review, they tagged sections (which could
be one sentence, multiple sentences, one paragraph, or multiple
paragraphs) with relevant categories. The predefined categories
used for tagging were: Instruction-use, Instruction-teach, Tools,
Policies, Motivations, Competencies, Outcomes, Future, Industry,
and Equity, aligned with the research questions described in Sub-
section 4.2. This collaborative step ensured that all team members
were aligned on the tagging criteria and approach.

Individual Tagging and Data Compilation. After reaching
4.9.2
a consensus on tagging methodology, the remainder of the tran-
scripts were independently tagged by one researcher, who was not
the interviewer. This approach helped maintain objectivity and
consistency in the tagging process. The tagged segments from all
transcripts were then compiled into an Excel sheet. This compila-
tion step included all identified segments categorized by theme.

Each segment entry in the Excel sheet was summarized into one
or a few sentences. This step was used to capture the essence of the
responses without losing the context or the main points expressed
by the interviewees.

4.9.3 Thematic Analysis. With the summarized segments, we con-
ducted a thematic analysis across all interviews. This analysis in-
volved 1) grouping summaries by category, 2) identifying patterns
and themes, and 3) synthesizing community thoughts.

Through this process, we aim to derive meaningful conclusions
from the interview data and understand the community’s views on
the various aspects covered in the interviews.

5 Educator and Developer Views: Results
We now present the results of our surveys and interviews. We
begin with the participants’ demographics from both surveys and
the interviews. Following this, we present the aggregated survey
and interview results for each research question.

5.1 Demographics of the Samples
First, we present the characteristics of the surveyed educators and
developers by providing details on their demographics. We also
present the demographics of the interviewed educators.

5.1.1 Educator Survey Demographics. In the educator survey (N = 76),
educators from the USA (28), Germany (13), Canada (11), UK (5),
and more countries participated, as shown in Table 10. Overall, we
gathered educators’ perspectives from North America, Europe, and
Australia. However, 6 respondents did not indicate the country of
their institution.

Table 10: Educator Survey – Country Institution is Located

Country

USA
Germany
Canada
UK
Sweden
Australia
Finland
France
Iceland
Ireland
Netherlands
Poland
Spain
Switzerland
Ukraine
No country given

Percent Respondents

36.8 %
17.1 %
14.5 %
6.6 %
5.3 %
1.3 %
1.3 %
1.3 %
1.3 %
1.3 %
1.3 %
1.3 %
1.3 %
1.3 %
1.3 %
6.6 %

31.6 % (24 out of 76) of the educators identify themselves as
females, 57.9 % (45 out of 76) as males, 2.6 % (2 out of 76) as non-
binary or gender diverse, and 5.3 % (4 out of 76) prefer not to disclose
(ES-29). The majority of the educator respondents described their
institutions (ES-24) as a university that grants graduate degrees
(52 out of 76), and the others teach at colleges or other types of
institutions, as shown in Table 11.

Most of the educators teach CS1 – Introduction to programming
(50.6 %, 39 out of 76; cf. Table 12), which is one of the courses we
assume would be most influenced by the abilities and potential of
GenAI. At the same time, it should be noted that the respondents
teach various other crucial computing courses, a total of 193 classes

Beyond the Hype

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

Table 11: Educator Survey – Institutional Characteristics (ES-
24)

Institution

Percent Respondents

Secondary
2-year college (associates)
Vocational school
College (bachelor’s degree granting)
University (graduate degree granting)
Other (research institutes)
No institution given

11.84 %
1.3 %
2.6 %
11.8 %
68.4 %
2.6 %
1.3 %

as displayed in Table 12. Among the courses listed as “other” are
the following: Data Science (5 responses), Data Base Systems (3
responses), Computing Education, and Web Technologies and De-
velopment (2 responses each). The diversity of courses also reflects
upon the diversity of the responding educators.

Table 12: Educator Survey – Course Characteristics (ES-12);
193 responses from 76 educators

Primary area

Percent Responses

Algorithms and Complexity
Architecture and Organization
Artificial Intelligence/ML
Computational Science
CS 1 – Introduction to Programming
CS 2 – Introduction to Data Structures
Discrete Structures
Human-Computer Interaction
Information Assurance and Security
Graphics and Visualization
Information Management
Networking and Communications
Operating Systems
Parallel and Distributed Computing
Platform-based Development
Programming Languages
Robotics
Social Issues and Professional Practice
Software Development Fundamentals
Software Engineering
Systems Fundamentals
Teacher Preparation (age 5–18)
Other

7.3 %
2.6 %
5.2 %
2.6 %
20.2 %
10.4 %
1.6 %
5.7 %
0.5 %
3.6 %
2.1 ˙%
1.6 %
2.6 %
1.6 %
0.5 %
4.7 %
0.5 %
2.1 %
5.7 %
7.3 %
1.6 %
2.1 %
8.3 %

We furthermore asked the educators how many years they have
been teaching (ES-28). Most of the surveyed educators proved to
have more than a decade of teaching experience, as the average
number of years is 15.8, with a median of 14.5 years (cf. Table 13).
The largest groups of educators have been teaching for 11 to 15
years (16 out of 76) and from 16 to 25 years (20 out of 76), so they
can be described as experienced on average.

5.1.2 Developer Survey Demographics. Based on our selection pro-
cess, N = 39 developers provided reasonably relevant responses
to our survey. As mentioned, 29 of them provided answers to all
questions (i. e., finished the survey). In this section, we present the
results of survey questions DS-17–19 (in the developer survey) to
characterize our sample.

Table 13: Educator Survey – Years of Teaching (ES-28)

Years

0–2
3–5
6–10
11–15
16–25
> 25
no answer

Number

Percent Respondents

7
9
14
16
21
8
1

9.2 %
11.8 %
18.4 %
21.1 %
27.6 %
10.5 %
1.3 %

18 developers provided the name of the country in which they
are currently employed (DS-17). Most developers who participated
are employed in the United States (66.7 %, 12 out of 18), or Germany
(22.2 %, 4 out of 18). Others work in France (5.6 %, 1 out of 18), or
the United Kingdom (5.6 %, 1 out of 18).

Moreover, we asked the developers about their job title (DS-18,
n=23). Most developers identified their job title as software developer
(70 %, 16 out of 23) followed by research engineers (13 %, 3 out of 23),
(scientific) researchers (13 %, 3 out of 23), and a software engineer
(4 %, 1 out of 23).

The companies of the developers (DS-19, n=27) can be char-
acterized as summarized in Table 14. The largest percentage of
developers (59.3 %, 16 out of 27) work in a large company with
more than 500 employees. A smaller number of developers work at
a research institute (11.1 %, 3 out of 27), a small or medium software
company (7.4 % each, 2 out of 27), a non-software focused company
(7.4 %, 2 out of 27), or for the government (3.7 %, 1 out of 27). One re-
spondent (3.7 %) selected the option “other” without specifying the
type of company any further. None of the participants are employed
in a start-up or non-profit organization.

Table 14: Developer Survey – Company Characteristics

Corporation Type

Percent Resp.

Start-up (10 engineers or less)
Small Software Company (11–50 engineers)
Medium Software Company (51–500 engineers)
Large Software Company (more than 500 engineers)
Non-profit
Non-software focused company
Government
Research Institute
Other (not specified)

0
7.4
7.4
59.3
0
7.4
3.7
11.1
3.7

Interview Sample Demographics. The authors initially built a
5.1.3
list of potential interviewees based on personal knowledge of who
was actively teaching with AI, publishing research on its use in
computing education classrooms, or building tools for use in com-
puting education. We then augmented that list based on the results
of the literature review, personal networking at the ITiCSE 2024
conference, and an email to a large mailing list. Next, we selected
people from the list to interview based on what would provide a
diverse set of experiences and ideas in terms of interviewee posi-
tion, seniority, nationality, gender, and race. Not everyone agreed
to be interviewed, so we made some substitutions with others on
the list that were not initially selected. Finally, we also intentionally

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

James Prather et al.

sought out some interviews from people who are less likely to be
selected, such as K-12 teachers, professors who teach computing
outside of computer science, and thoughtful non-users who have
intentionally decided to resist generative AI in all forms.

5.2 RQ1 – Policies
This research question was addressed by the survey for educators,
as well as the interview study. Policies applicable for software
developers were also gathered through the developer survey.

5.2.1 Educator Policies preventing, tolerating, or integrating GenAI.
In the survey study, we asked educators about their classroom
policies regarding the use of GenAI tools by students (ES-1, n = 76).
The majority of faculty do not explicitly disallow students from
using GenAI tools (59 out of 76, 77.6 %). Roughly a third of faculty
actively incorporate GenAI into their courses (ES-2; 27 out of 76,
35.5 %). This is particularly interesting as the majority of faculty
(57 out of 76, 75 %) report believing the skills to create software
have changed after the advent of GenAI (ES-3, see Section 5.8
for more details on how the competencies have changed). Thus,
incorporating GenAI seems to be lagging behind the percentage of
faculty who think that skills have changed.

Among faculty who are disallowing students from using GenAI,
we learned from ES-10 (“Are you doing anything to prevent GenAI
tools’ use in your course?”) that 58.8 % (10 out of 17) are working
to prevent their use.

Among those faculty trying to prevent the use of GenAI, they
reported, in response to ES-11, (“What are you doing to prevent
GenAI tools’ use in your course?”) on different actions they had
taken. For example, 36.0 % (9 out of 25) reported that, together
with the students, they carry out code reviews in various forms on
assignments and tests, to see whether the students have understood
their own code or whether typical AI markers can be found. Another
28.0 % (7 out of 25) of the responses describe changes they have
made to assignments and exams. Another point mentioned several
times is the appeal to the students’ social responsibility (20.0 %; 5
out of 25). Technical measures and the introduction of workflows
to be documented were rarely mentioned (8.0 %; 2 each).

The following quote in response to ES-11 is an example of a
detailed explanation of an educator regarding their attempts to
prevent students from using GenAI tools in their courses:

“We tell the students it’s not allowed, and make sure
they see that by putting a question on our course rules
quiz. We, for now, have a few patterns we look for that
are typical of AI code but which we don’t teach in our
class that we automatically scan for as students submit
assignments. When we see these we do a human check of
whether we think the code was probably written by an
AI or not. Last semester, in 13/14 cases, accused students
admitted they used AI (the other person learned some
extra concepts from alternate resources and was able to
demonstrate understanding of them). For next semester,
we’re also introducing a citation policy: If students use
stuff they learned outside of our teaching resources, they
are required to cite where they learned it. This is good
practice in writing code anyway, but it also gives us an

extra way to distinguish AI coding from people using
third-party resources legitimately.”

Based on responses to question ES-2 (“Are you incorporating
GenAI tools (e. g., actively integrating it into the curriculum or
exercises) into your recent courses (within the last 12 months)?”)
we found that 35.5 % (27 out of 76) of instructors are integrating
GenAI into their courses. In the follow-up question ES-21, we asked
those educators to elaborate on how their teaching approaches
have changed in an open-question format. Two members of the
working group performed a thematic analysis of the 60 open-ended
responses. The following five themes summarize how educators
changed their teaching approaches:
(1) Focus on different programming skills: This theme cap-
tured responses from the educators who have refocused the
skills that they teach. Some respondents refer to existing skills
that are nonetheless now more important than before, such as
reading code (8 respondents), modifying code (1), testing code
(1), and problem decomposition (2). Others refer to entirely
new skills that did not exist prior to the use of GenAI, such as
writing prompts (4) and incorporating code from GenAI into
larger projects (1). Still others refer to a lessening importance
of existing skills; for example, that syntax is now less important
than before and that the focus should be on a higher level of
abstraction (3).

(2) Policy on when and how to use GenAI. Respective respon-
dents report setting expectations to students of tasks where
they should use GenAI and when they should not (7 partici-
pants). In addition, if students are allowed to use these tools,
these respondents require that students describe how they used
the tools including clear attribution to GenAI (3), e. g., “I actively
encourage students to use GenAI tools and set expectations where
they should be used and where they should not. I have created a
policy that when in doubt students are allowed to use the tools
but they have to clearly and fully describe the use.”

(3) Change lecture to adapt to GenAI. Participants report demon-
strating working with GenAI in class (12), incorporating GenAI
into in-class activities (2), using more active learning in class
(2), and showing non-deterministic responses from the GenAI
in class (1).

(4) Teach students to use GenAI effectively. Some participants
reported encouraging students to use GenAI (2) and others
reported trying to teach students how to be more effective when
working with GenAI beyond the demonstrations in class (2).
The following quote illustrates: “Focusing on teaching students
prompt design techniques like tree of thoughts, etc. that utilize
the underlying architecture of transformer models.”

(5) Not yet / need to at some point. Some participants responded
that they had not changed in class activities yet but recognized
they may need to in the future (8 participants). “None, so far. I
think their negative impact on a course is, at this point, less than
other types of illicit support that students might seek”, “Not much
at the moment, but I feel I need to do more here.”
Yet another follow-up question for educators integrating GenAI
asked how assessment approaches have changed as a result of
GenAI tools (ES-22). Again, two members of the working group
performed a thematic analysis of the 63 open-ended responses to

Beyond the Hype

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

question ES-22 and any responses to question ES-21 that related
to changes in assessments. We uncovered six themes representing
how assessment approaches have changed:
(1) Process over product. Six participants described assessing
students on their process of creating software more than on
the correctness of the final result. One participant is “... shifting
things to watching the process (ongoing use of repos, iteration,
trackable code growth, etc.) vs final artifact evaluation”. Another
focuses on “More incremental checkpoints and questioning the
process before completion... the end work is less weighted and the
process towards the solution is more emphasized.”

(2) Invigilated exams. Thirteen participants reported placing
more emphasis on the proctoring of assessments. Six described
more emphasis on proctoring, for example, “programming as-
signments are now preparation for the proctored weekly quizzes.”
Three participants spoke of the importance of giving exams on
paper. Seven spoke of adding or placing more emphasis on oral
exams: “Oral exams are now a vital part of student assessment.”
(3) Increased weighting on exams. Ten participants decreased
the weight of unproctored assessments and increased the weight
of proctored exams in assigning grades. One participant wrote,
“Minimized unsupervised assessment weight (e. g., assignments
and projects) ... Increased supervised assessment weight (e. g., tests
and exams).” One participant described instituting “a minimum
cutoff for exams”.

(4) No change (yet). Nine participants said they had not made any
changes with an additional six participants saying they had not
made changes yet but had plans to in the future.

(5) Confuse the LLM. Five participants chose to create assign-
ments where the questions were designed to make the LLMs
do poorly. One participant wrote, “Homework assignments have
been customized so that LLMs can’t solve them well.”

(6) Describe AI use. Three participants are asking students to
describe how they use GenAI on their assignments and provide
chat logs with the LLM, as exemplified in the following quote:
“We require students to disclose if they used GenAI (as part of
any outside help), and if they do, they are required to provide the
prompts that they used to get their solution.”
In addition, interview results revealed concerns of educators
and researchers around AI policy. As GenAI tools are appearing
more and more in the classroom, both institutions and individual
instructors are adding policies around GenAI use. One concern
repeated throughout the data was one of user privacy. There is
the concern that students’ private data will be leaked through the
use of publicly available AI models or that it may be stored in a
country that has different data privacy laws than the institution’s
host country. Some also expressed concern that these models will
learn off of private course assignments and teaching materials.
Then there are academic concerns, which primarily take three
forms. First, some institutions will attempt to ban or limit their
use. This was particularly apparent at the K-12 level where many
schools and school districts have set policies in place to ban AI
tools like ChatGPT entirely. Second, some individual instructors
are adding policies to their courses either banning or limiting the
use of generative AI tools. Third, some instructors are allowing
or even encouraging generative AI usage, but requiring students

to use specific tools that will not reveal the answer or requiring
that a student must be able to explain the code that they submit.
Sometimes these tools are built by the university and housed locally,
which also addresses the privacy concerns.

Thinking about privacy policies and its impact on instruction,

one instructor said:

“I know at our university we are concerned about [pri-
vacy], and are trying to get certain tools with basically
a university wide license for our students. I think we
were trying to get a university-wide license for [GitHub]
Copilot.”

Speaking on their own course policies, another instructor said:
“The bottom line is you need to demonstrate that you
understand the material and anything that you turn in.
It needs to be something that you know you’ve created
and can fully understand what’s going on”

One K-12 teacher said:

“One of the major changes that’s gonna happen is that
[anonymous state] has a whole bunch of new policy
regulation guidance and support around generative AI
and schools and teachers are expected to follow that.
Now, teachers are going to have to know about those
policy pieces, and we’re going to have to figure out how
to include that in the learning that they’re doing on
top of all of the other policy work that they’re doing.
In addition to just the classroom work, [teachers] now
have to also be aware of all of this extra policy and
regulation about it, too.”

Industry Policies. Eight developers stated that they do not
5.2.2
use GenAI tools (cf. Subsection 5.7). Regarding industry policies
around this non-use (subset of DS-14 and DS-15), one developer
answered that “it’s currently not allowed to use GenAI tools but we
expect it will be in the near future”. Interestingly, none of the other
replies concerned their company’s policies.

5.3 RQ2 and RQ3 – Instruction-use and

Instruction-support

The second and third research question pertain to teaching students
how to use GenAI tools effectively, and how to support them doing
so. For example, students may be taught explicitly how to use GenAI
to help them write software. Of the educators who participated in
our survey, 27 were actively incorporating GenAI into their courses.
This section reports on these instructors and their replies, before
reporting on the educators who were interviewed.

Educators incorporating GenAI teach a variety of courses (ES-
12). Most of the surveyed instructors either taught introduction to
programming courses (11 out of 27, 40.7%) or software engineering
courses (9 out of 27, 33.3%). The remaining instructors (7 out of
27, 25.9%) taught more advanced courses such as databases, data
visualization, and artificial intelligence.

Course sizes varied widely (ES-13), as shown in Figure 5—half
the courses were 50 students or smaller (13 out of 27, 48.1%), while
the other half were larger than 50 students (14 out of 27, 51.9%).

The large majority of instructors who incorporated GenAI into
their courses reported that both instructors and students were

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

James Prather et al.

used GenAI for feedback, correcting student work, validating qual-
ity of assignments, and to support grading, as shown in Table 16.

Table 16: Ways in which instructors incorporated GenAI (ES-
17).

Answer
to teach students about using GenAI tools
as educational content generator for teaching material
to automatically provide feedback to students using a
custom tool
to support the correction of student work
to validate the quality of assignments
to support grading

Count
20
16
5

4
3
2

The interviews revealed that while many instructors are using
generative AI to provide feedback to student submissions or in-
crease access to student help-seeking, many are still not directly
using it in class to support their teaching. What we did find still
seems rather rudimentary and is one piece of this that we expect
will continue to evolve. First, some instructors are using generative
AI to help students understand bias in the models and planned
in-class activities around it. Others will use it to generate code or
proofs and then have students attempt to pick it apart, determining
if it is correct or incorrect, and why. For example, one instructor
detailed an in-class activity on generating code and then having
students write tests as a first homework assignment. Finally, several
educators mentioned using generative AI coding tools in upper-
division courses or courses with heavy software development tasks
as a way to prepare students for industry.

Regarding bias in the models, one instructor said:

“And then these models can perpetuate bias because
they’re trained on data that’s biased. And we try to look
at some examples of that. It does seem like students are
a little bit surprised about some of these bias issues. I
think it’s important to talk about how these tools can
have bias in them.”

When talking about an upper division course that an instructor

teaches, they said:

“So for upper division classes, where the point is coding
as a professional would: Hell yeah, like we’ll [use it for]
everything. It’ll be Gen AI from beginning to end.”

Regarding using it for large software development project courses,

one instructor said:

“I’m about to teach a software development course that
I’ve taught a lot before. Well, AI and generative AI is
a big part of software development. So I’m going to be
working on teaching generative AI as a tool, as part
of the software development process as well. And so
working with students on: okay, what can it do? How do
we use it effectively and integrate it as a tool? Just like
we have IDEs and debuggers and linters and everything
else.”

In the interviews, the participants were predominantly mention-
ing using the GenAI tools to directly interface with the students

Figure 5: Instructors integrated GenAI into a wide variety of
course sizes (ES-13).

expected to use GenAI for their courses (20 out of 27, 74.1%), as
summarized in Table 15 (ES-14). However, students using the tools
does not necessarily mean they are being trained in how to use
them, as the instructor may have used the GenAI tools as a tutor.

Table 15: Most instructors who integrated GenAI expected
that both instructors and students would use GenAI (ES-14).

Who uses GenAI

instructors only
students only
instructors and students

Number of Respondents

3
4
20

To explore classroom use of GenAI in more depth, we asked
instructors how they expect students to access GenAI tools (ES-15).
As shown in Figure 6, when students were expected to use GenAI
tools, instructors incorporated a tool that was free to use, like a
free publicly available tool (16 out of 27, 59.3%) or a paid tool that
allowed students to use it for free (4 out of 27, 14.8%).

In response to a question asking which types of GenAI tools
instructors incorporated (ES-16), all educators reported that they
used standard industry GenAI tools like ChatGPT and Copilot (27
out of 27, 100%), while a few instructors also used customized tools
that the instructors had created themselves (2 out of 27, 7.4%).

Figure 6: Instructors preferred to use tools that did not re-
quire students to pay (ES-15).

Question ES-17 provided additional insight, finding instructors
primarily incorporated GenAI tools to teach students about using
GenAI tools (20 out of 27, 74.1%) and as an educational content gen-
erator for teaching material (16 out of 27, 63.0%). Other educators

Beyond the Hype

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

and help them with their work. A common theme was tweaking
such tools as to provide meaningful learning experience.

“I added the functionality of having an instructor be
able to specify keywords or concepts that we didn’t want
to have show up in a response to be able to kind of better
tailor the responses for the courses.”

Another theme was using the GenAI tools in specific contexts to
support students while not interfering with their learning.

“So it is something we’ve built into an office hour queu-
ing system. So we have a website students log into when
they want to join an office hour. Just join the office hour
queue and get TA support. And when the students type
in what their question is, they’re gonna ask the TA here,
or why they’re in office hours, then to our tool and it ba-
sically takes and adds some context to the question. And
says this question is from a student with this level of
knowledge, and who knows these languages and so on.
And give them an answer, and don’t provide a complete
working program.”

Finally, the participants often mention they would use the GenAI
tools to create learning materials or brainstorm lesson plans.

“And so, we’ve used it, me and [CS teacher] have used
it. And so is our other teacher a little bit. I think we’re
probably the only ones, but it’s it’s exclusively to help
us with our lesson planning. It’s phenomenal.”

5.4 RQ4-Motivations
To better understand the educators’ motivations behind their deci-
sion to prevent, tolerate or actively integrate GenAI tools, we asked
three questions in the respective survey:

• ES-9 – Why don’t you allow GenAI tools in your courses?
• ES-18 – Why have you incorporated GenAI tools into your

recent course?

• ES-20 – Why have you not incorporated GenAI tools (e. g.,
actively integrating it into the curriculum or exercises) into
your recent courses?

The reasons for not allowing the use of GenAI are very diverse
(ES-9): 39.3 % (11 out of 28) of the statements are about didactic
aspects and curricular approaches, with a common theme being that
students should first acquire a solid foundation in programming. A
further 21.4 % (6 out of 28) name tasks or topics in which students
can use GenAI and how they should document their use. 17.9 %
(5 out of 28) of the statements express an attitude towards the
students: students would misuse GenAI, and they do not (yet) have
the skills to use GenAI or to understand and interpret the results.
It is also interesting to note some statements (10.7 %; 3 out of 28)
reflecting negativity towards GenAI in general; for example, that
GenAI is not capable of solving the course assignments anyway.
Another concern is that “GenAI will almost certainly be criminalized
(as stealing code)”, or that only humans should write code, not an
AI. Organizational and legal aspects were mentioned in only 7.1 %
(2 out of 28) of the statements.

The following quote from the survey summarizes a general view

of these educators on the use of GenAI tools in their courses:

“Introductory CS students need to learn basic skills be-
fore they can move on. It is a similar situation to calcu-
lators in K-12, where usage is not generally permitted
in the primary grades where basic skills and number
sense are being taught.”

Educators also provided their motivation and rationale for in-
corporating GenAI tools into their recent courses (ES-18), which
asked: “Why have you incorporated GenAI tools into your recent
course?”. 24 open-ended responses were collected, and a thematic
analysis by two of the authors revealed the following reasons:
(1) Preparation for industry and career readiness. Some edu-
cators believe students will use GenAI tools in their career, so it
is a matter of career-readiness to successfully use these tools: “I
believe that nearly everyone will use AI assistants like Copilot and
ChatGPT to program in the future. I want to prepare my students
for their careers and hence wish to train them in how to use those
tools.” Another related response is: “In work life, students will
use AI, too. So, we try to work under ‘normal’ work conditions in
the course.”

(2) Ethical use and responsibility. Another reason educators
mentioned was their responsibility as a teacher. Due to the
sheer potential and assumed impact of GenAI, but also its bias
and challenges, educators think it is responsible to teach about
GenAI: “Because to not do so would be irresponsible, and because
GenAI engages students.”. Another educator highlights respec-
tive concerns: “I have observed the technology’s usage with dis-
astrous learning outcomes, easily shown in a few iterations of two
different courses where students did very well on homework that
is code-oriented and were unable to do even the most basic things
on the same topic in written or oral context.”

(3) Efficiently supporting student learning. In some cases, edu-
cators use LLMs to compensate for a lack of teaching resources,
or to generate teaching and learning material. For example, “For
scalability reasons (my teaching team is too small for the large
quantity of students we have). To support students in their mo-
ment of need and better support their learning.” Several educators
mentioned how they themselves use GenAI: “It makes me faster
at generating materials, like brainstorming the setup for exam
questions.”

(4) Adapting to recent technological trends. Another motivat-
ing factor for educators to use GenAI tools was to educate
themselves about recent technologies. For example, “I wanted
to get a personal sense of the capabilities of models, and to then
showcase effective ways to use it in the class should students elect
to use it.” For courses with an AI focus, integrating GenAI was a
given: “I teach an introduction to artificial intelligence. Not using
GenAI tools would be a great disservice to the students.”
We were also interested in why educators do not incorporate
GenAI into their courses (ES-20). We identified five areas of under-
lying motivations within 55 statements which we categorized and
summarized.
(1) Lack of educator resources. 24 of the statements were related
to the educators. Educators cited a lack of time, lack of skills,
or lack of didactic competency in particular.

(2) Students’ motivation and abilities. Another important as-
pect mentioned by 10 educators was students’ perceived skills

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

James Prather et al.

and motivation. For example, educators assume that students
already know and use GenAI, that they teach themselves how
to use it anyway – but also that students lack the skills to use it
properly.

(3) Doubts regarding usefulness. Attitudes towards GenAI also
appear to be a motivating factor in 8 responses. Educators are
cautious about the technology and its benefits, especially in
basic programming education.

(4) External factors. Institutional factors such as a lack of support,
unresolved legal issues or privacy concerns were also mentioned
in 6 responses.

(5) Other reasons. The remaining 7 statements concerned general
teaching practice issues, such as not teaching a suitable course
at the moment or explaining the use of GenAI to students but
not integrating the tools further.

In the interviews, the participants often stressed the importance
of designing and providing solutions that focus on education. A
common concern was that general tools are focused on providing
complete solutions as opposed to helping students learn.

“The tools are really good at giving complete working
program functions. But what we want with it, with a
student who has a code problem is some kind of hint to
get them going and get them unstuck. So a lot of times
the tools give too much help.”

Another motivation for solutions that are educationally-focused is
centered around potential over-reliance of students on these always
available assistants.

“they can become very reliant on just asking questions
as soon as they get stuck. And I think the idea of being
able to guide students much in the way that a human
teaching assistant would. I mean, if you go and ask a
TA for help. They would typically try and use a kind of
Socratic method to maybe ask a question back at you
to guide you to a solution rather than just giving you
the answer.”

Another common theme often mentioned by participants was
that GenAI tools often provide a significant help to the instructors,
easing their work load and allowing them to focus their attention
where it is needed the most.

“The idea was that basically I get another teaching as-
sistant, another person in the room that can give the
students tailored feedback. I do think there’s a small
subset of students that actually prefer getting feedback
from the AI. Another goal of mine has been to increase
the breadth of students that are getting through intro-
ductory CS courses.”

A very important motivation for using GenAI in computing
education often mentioned by the participants was providing im-
mediate (timely) help to the students. This would otherwise not be
possible in many contexts.

“in the age of AI for me philosophically, and technologi-
cally, this is strictly a net positive, because we now have
the ability to provide students with far more real time
and iterative feedback, not only for our undergraduates
on campus at Harvard and Yale but open courseware

audience around the world, who never had access to TA’s
office hour sections, and that human support structure,
and they still don’t have a human support structure, but
arguably an increasingly good approximation thereof.”

On a related note, another person said,

“[We] leverage GenAI to provide help at scale, which is
one of the things we’re always trying to do and modify
how we teach computer science to better help more peo-
ple succeed. That’s always my goal. Help more people.
My diversity of people succeed in computing and find
interest in it, you know. Use it to do interesting things.”
Some participants explained their motivation along the lines of
students needing to encounter GenAI tools during their studies
because they will be using them in practice.

“I’m kind of pushing them hard to adopt the view that
it’s almost academic malpractice to not teach people
how to write with these things, because once you’re out
in practice you’re going to have access to these and your
competitor [...] will have access to these things. And so
you need to know how to use them responsibly, how to
best use them. How to check them for errors like, what
types of things can go wrong with this, etc, etc.”

Among the participants studying GenAI in computing education,
a common motivation was the need to understand how these are
changing the classroom:

“I think one main point for me would be, how the in-
troduction of GenAI into introductory programming
courses are affecting students, learning and also affect-
ing the concept that the students need to learn and then
how the problem can be this become the solution itself,
how we can utilize the affordances of GenAI. For helping
students with learning what they need to learn.”

5.5 RQ5 – Tools
As mentioned in Section 5.3, all educators reported using standard
industry GenAI tools like ChatGPT and Copilot (ES-16, 27 out of
27, 100%) via the online survey. Only two instructors also used
customized tools that they had created themselves (2 out of 27,
7.4%).

Interviews revealed a varying range of tools from AI-powered
assistants to specific applications designed to enhance learning
experiences in programming and other courses. One notable cat-
egory of tools is Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), which
not only provides information but does so within the context of
a given course. Another category of tools tracked student inter-
actions and completion of the course assessment elements, which
helps educators understand how students are learning so that they
can adapt course curriculum and delivery accordingly. These tools
initially were used and deployed in computing courses but now are
being increasingly adopted in other disciplines such as business
and economics.

The usage and impact of these tools are considerable. GenAI
tools are extensively used in writing problem sets, assisting with
assignments, and providing explanations and help in coding tasks.
There are tools specifically developed to facilitate functionalities

Beyond the Hype

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

for asking questions, explaining code, writing code, and fixing code.
A common trend is to put guardrails in place so these tools cannot
directly return generated code. Many of these tools are built on top
of existing AI models and are trained on specific course material.

“So it’s essentially like a sandbox version of ChatGPT.
Now, that doesn’t mean, I think, that it’s completely
safe. But I think that what it means is that the responses
that students get from the model are going to be based
only on the material that the instructor has trained the
model on.”

An interesting observation by educators who deployed and used
GenAI assistants in their courses is the noticeable reduction in the
use of office hours by students following the deployment of these
tools, indicating a shift in how students seek help and interact with
course material.

In terms of design and feedback mechanisms, the tools are crafted

to be simple, avoiding complex options for students.

“I think AI tools in CSed should be designed to ensure
users remain cognitively engaged in their coding tasks,
preventing situations where users can offload the neces-
sary cognitive efforts onto the AI without thought, while
also not causing frustration.”

The responses provided by these tools are also simplified, and
students have the ability to offer feedback on the responses they
receive. This feedback loop is critical for continuous improvement.

“If the student doesn’t know what the AI is doing and
how it’s coming up with something, they cannot debug
this help seeking tool.”

The use of GenAI in education extends beyond direct student
support. GenAI tools are employed to analyze student data, includ-
ing test case-driven auto-graders, knowledge component-based
tutors, and adaptive feedback mechanisms.

5.6 RQ6 – Perceived Outcomes
In the interviews, instructors shared perceived outcomes of GenAI
use that they consider to be both negative and positive. The negative
perceptions mostly revolve around students using GenAI to write
code for them. This has raised concern in multiple ways. First, there
is concern that the students are able to circumvent work by having
the AI do the work for them. Multiple instructors have reported a
sizable increase in academic dishonesty violations in the last few
semesters.

“The bar to cheating is lower because of these GenAI
tools.”

Second, it is perceived that this use of GenAI is resulting in lack
of actual learning. For example, a scenario shared by professors is
that students will use GenAI to complete open assignments and
therefore not actually understand the learning objectives. Profes-
sors are saying this scenario causes students to be unprepared for
assessments.

“I know I don’t think we’ve ever had such large num-
bers of students who go into a test and simply can’t do
anything.”

In some cases, it appears that students think they are learning
by using the AI but they are mistaken. Even when using GenAI

in ways supported by instructors, it can be problematic for stu-
dents. Instructors shared that it is very easy for students to be
over-trusting of the AI-generated suggestions and waste their time
going down incorrect paths. In some extreme cases, students have
been discouraged from continuing their education due to the fear
that AI will make their careers obsolete.

However, there are still many positive perceived outcomes shared
by instructors. First, students who use GenAI are able to create work
that is more complicated and of a higher quality than they would
without assistance. This includes both coding projects and writing
assignments. Used as a tutor, AI can help students by explaining
difficult concepts, spotting logical errors, and even providing better
compiler error messages than the actual compiler. Use of GenAI in
this capacity has even been perceived to lower the load on office
hours held by instructors and teaching assistants.

The interviews also revealed some larger structural changes re-
ported by instructors. One common theme is the idea that the very
concept of being a programmer will change. It is predicted that
students will graduate with fewer fundamental coding skills, but
with the ability to produce more advanced work. Some instructors
predict a branching into two fields: computer scientists and con-
versational programmers. Conversational programmers will focus
much less on writing code and much more on understanding how
to write code and use AI tools to generate code for them. One pro-
fessor went so far as to say that this shift in computing education is
impactful on the same scale as the invention of the printing press.

5.7 RQ7 – Industry Usage
In this section, the perspectives of industry developers towards
GenAI tools are presented. Moreover, we compare the develop-
ers’ views and their use of GenAI with educators’ beliefs of the
industry’s use of GenAI.

The majority of surveyed developers (31 out of 39, 79.5 %) use
GenAI tools in their professional role in developing software (DS-1).
Eight developers claimed not to use GenAI. Two of these stated that
they were concerned about ethical issues as their main reason not
to use it (DS-14). The reasons “My company does not let me”, “I do not
believe they will help me code better”, “Haven’t gotten around to it!”
and “I tried it and did not work for my needs” were stated once each.
Three developers did not provide a main reason why they do not
use GenAI. Elaborated reasons were entered by three developers.
One developer stated that they did not receive the “needed code”,
maybe they were trying on “not so standard” problems (DS-15).
Other reasons were mentioned in the open-ended response field:
“In theory AI generated code could be a derivative work” and “it’s not
allowed to use GenAI tools but we expect it will be in the near future”
(cf. Subsection 5.2).

In the following, we present the results of the responses from
developers who are users of GenAI (n=31). We asked developers
about the frequency of their GenAI use in their professional role
(DS-2). Most of the developers in our survey reported that they use
GenAI at least once a day, with 52.2 % reporting using it several
times a day and 4.3 % using it once a day (see Figure 7). A similar
question (ES-7) was provided to educators, asking them to estimate
how often they believe professional developers use GenAI in their

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

James Prather et al.

work (see Figure 7). Many educators in our survey expect profes-
sional developers to use GenAI at least routinely (36.4 %). But the
percentage of developers in our survey reporting to use GenAI
every day is 56.5 % (sum of responses to “once a day” and “several
times a day”). This indicates that educators’ expectations seem to
underestimate the use of GenAI tools by professional developers.
Asked to select the types of tools being used (DS-3), developers
reported that autocompletion tools are the most frequently used
type (52 %, 16 out of 31), followed by Chatbots (48 %, 15 out of 31).
Nine developers (29 %) did not provide any answer to question DS-3.
We asked developers to identify the tasks for which they use
GenAI from a preset list of programming tasks (DS-5). Eight de-
velopers did not answer this question. On average the developers
selected 4.4 tasks (median 4). The most often selected tasks were
generating code and autocompleting code (both selected by 17 devel-
opers, 70.8 %). Furthermore, the tasks modifying code and creating
documentation/comments were selected by the majority. The least
frequently selected task is modeling algorithms, i. e., one developer
selected this option. Only one other task, “research”, was mentioned
for Other, please specify by one developer.

Just prior to the closed-ended DS-5, we provided an open-ended
question asking the developers to describe how they use GenAI
tools in their professional work (DS-4). It was intentionally placed
there to avoid influencing the developers by the options offered
in DS-5. The open-ended question was answered by 17 developers
mostly on a high abstraction level and was coded using the existing
options of DS-5 as a starting point. In general, the explicitly named
tasks match the selected tasks in DS-5, but most developers selected
more tasks in response to DS-5 than they had selected in DS-4. On
average, 2.6 tasks were tagged in the open-ended answers to DS-4
and 4.4 tasks were selected in the closed-ended question DS-5.

In the following, some interesting examples of the open-ended
responses are provided: Two developers explicitly stated that they
use GenAI for repetitive tasks, or to “automate boring stuff (i. e.,
code that no human should ever write).” Three developers stated they
use GenAI for generating code or examples for languages they are
not comfortable or less familiar with. A common theme was to use
GenAI to avoid reading documentation (mentioned 4 times) or to
“get help with undocumented features” (mentioned once). For the
task modifying code, refactoring or cleaning code were mentioned
explicitly by two developers. Interestingly, one developer stated
they use GenAI to get “code reviewed to make it more clear, concise
and maintainable” but did not select modifying code and one de-
veloper claimed to use GenAI to “explain errors or exceptions for
frameworks that I rarely use” but did not select “Debugging.” Further
notable examples that did not fit into the existing categories were
“Generating workshop material,” helping “with unusual tasks (e. g.,
I recently had to convert timestamps stored in a funny text format
into a number of minutes . . . in Excel)”, “summarizing large text”,
and “writing quality updates”. The latter two seem to be focused on
prose text instead of program code.

We asked educators to report their perceptions of which tasks
developers use GenAI tools for (ES-8). 74 educators answered this
question. Educators, on average, selected 6.3 tasks that they assume
developers use GenAI for (median 6). Most frequently, the educators
selected generating code (79.2 %), followed by autocompleting code
(75.3 %), and least frequently modeling algorithms (20.8 %). Only the

tasks modeling algorithms, modifying code, generating ideas, and
debugging were not selected by the majority of the educators. Five
educators selected Other, please specify. The following statements
by educators should be noted: “Most of the ndustry [sic!] people
I know are just experimenting, not using it for official tasks”, “all
of the above”, “exploring alternatives, explaining code, explaining
downsides/upsides of approaches”, and “developers I’ve talked use ai
differently depending on their context.” The comparison of the results
from educators and developers is summarized in Figure 8.

The frequencies of educators estimating developers’ GenAI us-
age and actual developers’ GenAI usage seem to approximately
match for the tasks generating code, autocompleting code, and pro-
viding code examples. There is a particularly higher percentage
of educators who identified getting started with a problem, model-
ing algorithms, generating ideas, generating test cases, and finding
resources/documentation/libraries. Interestingly, more developers
selected modifying code than educators. In all other cases, the ex-
pectation of the educators were higher.

Figure 9 shows the ratings of the usefulness of GenAI as reported
by the developers (n=21, DS-6). Almost all developers who answered
(95 %, 20 out of 21) find using GenAI at least a little useful. Six
developers out of 21 (29 %) find it very useful and only one developer
did not find it useful.

At the same time, the majority of developers (81 %, 17 out of 21)
who answered the subsequent question (DS-7) think GenAI makes
their work more efficient. Three developers (14 %) saw no change,
and only one developer found GenAI to make their work much less
efficient.

When asked about the harmfulness of GenAI (n=21, DS-8), the
majority of our surveyed developers found it not harmful (62 %,
13 out of 21), one third a little harmful (33 %, 7 out of 21), and
one developer moderately harmful (5 %). Six of the developers who
found GenAI (a little) harmful elaborated on the harmfulness (DS-
9). Two themes emerged from the thematic analysis. The first one
was wrong results or bugs in the code (even for simple cases,
n=5) and the second represents concerns regarding code quality
(which is reported to be “generally worse than humans”, n=1). To
present more specific examples, one developer reported on an issue
with an invalid SQL statement and another developer said that
GenAI invented features. A developer summarized that every line
of code needs to be rechecked – even though errors may only occur
in rare cases.

5.8 RQ8 – Competencies
5.8.1 Educators’ Perspectives. The majority of educators (57 out of
76) who participated in the survey believe the skills needed to create
software have changed after the advent of GenAI (ES-3). Among
educators who have changed their courses to integrate GenAI, 25
out of 27 believe the skills to create software have changed. In
contrast, among educators who have not changed their courses to
integrate AI, 32 out of 49 believe the skills have changed.

Examining educators’ opinions based on whether they believe
the skills to create software have changed, we found that among
faculty who do not believe the skills have changed, only 2 out
of 19 have changed their courses to incorporate GenAI. However,

Beyond the Hype

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

Figure 7: Left: Frequencies of developers (n=23) reporting on their use of GenAI tools as part of their professional role. Right:
Perspective of educators (n=76) about the frequent use of GenAI tools by professional developers.

Figure 8: Comparison of tasks developers use GenAI for and educators think developers use it for.

Figure 9: Ratings of the usefulness of GenAI as reported by
the developers (N=21)

among faculty who believe the skills have changed, 25 out of 57
have changed their courses to incorporate GenAI.

Question 4 of the educator survey (ES-4) was given to faculty
who responded “No” to whether the skills needed to write software
have changed. The question was “Please elaborate on your last
response why skills have not changed. (open-ended)”. Two members
of the working group performed a thematic analysis of the 16 open

ended responses on why skills have not changed uncovering the
following themes:

• Same Skills/Shifting Importance. The largest group of re-
spondents, seven, believe that the skills are the same. However,
the importance of these skills has changed. For example, multi-
ple participants reported believing that understanding code is
still crucial, but code evaluation has become more important.
“Software skills remain a mixture of design, implementation, static
analysis, and debugging. Changing the balances does not change
the core skills involved.” Their responses seem to indicate that
evaluating code generated by AI is not different than the code
evaluated in the past.

• Accelerating skilled programmers. Two respondents believe
that GenAI will only serve to speed up programmers who are
already skilled on their own. “GenAI is only a tool which can

several times 52.2%once a year4.3%once a month8.7%once a week21.7%several times 8.7%once a day4.3%Developer report of frequency of GenAI usagea dayper weekevery day30.7%routinely37.3%rarely2.7%sometimes29.3%Educator perception of frequency of developer usage of GenAImodeling algorithmsgetting started with a problemgenerating ideasgenerating codemodifying codeautocompleting codedebuggingcreating documentation/commentsfinding resources/documentation/librariesproviding code examplesgenerate test cases0.00%20.00%40.00%60.00%80.00%Educator expectationsDeveloper report0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%not usefula little usefulmoderately usefulquite usefulvery usefulITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

James Prather et al.

speed up the development process for those already skilled and
knowledgeable.”

• Know everything. One participant believe that programmers
still need to know everything at all levels below them regardless
of GenAI: “Using gen ai is a lot like being a team lead. The team
leads and project managers still need the skills of the programmers
under them”. However, it was unclear how deep they felt these
skills should go.

• Don’t know yet. One participant believe that GenAI is changing
too rapidly for us to know if or how these skills will change. “Too
little time to know (from my limited point of view)”.
Question 5 on the educator survey was given to participants
who replied “Yes” to the question of whether the skills to write
software have changed with the advent of GenAI (ES-5). Question
5 asked: “In what ways do you think the skills needed to create
software have changed with the introduction of GenAI tools?”. Two
members of the working group performed open-coding on the 50
open-ended responses followed by a thematic analysis to uncover
the following themes related to why educators think skills have
changed:
• Less writing, more reading code. The most common responses
from participants were that reading and understanding code is
more important (21 participants): “It’s becoming more important
to be able to read code that you have not written” and writing
syntactically correct code from scratch is less important (11 par-
ticipants), “There is less need to write code.”

• Higher-level skills are needed. Fifteen participants said that
writing software with GenAI makes higher level skills more
important. Examples of higher level skills included creativity,
problem understanding, problem specification, problem decom-
position, software design, and software architecture. “The focus
needs to be more on the algorithmic thinking and problem solv-
ing, not the actual syntax/coding”, and “Problem decomposition
becomes essential in a way it wasn’t in the past.”

• Evaluating and fixing code. Eleven participants reported that
evaluating code (testing) from the GenAI is an important skill
and nine participants said debugging the code from GenAI is
important as well: “Code testing and debugging, if not previously
emphasized, should be now.”

• Prompting as a new skill. Seven participants reported that
being able to prompt the GenAI to receive desired code is a new
and important skill: “There are new skills like prompting AI.”
The educators who believe skills have changed (ES-6) chose
problem understanding as the most important skill for programming
with GenAI. They see reading code as the second most important
competency and problem decomposition as the third most important.
Only three people who allowed GenAI in their classes changed
any of the learning objectives of their recent courses (ES-19); six
people reported not changing them at all.

5.8.2 Developers’ Perspectives. In question 10 of the developer
survey (DS-10), we asked the developers whether the competencies
required to professionally develop software are changing due to the
availability of GenAI tools. 21 developers responded: 12 of them
(57 %) indicated a slight change, 4 of them a moderate change, and 5
of them no change.

The 16 participants who recognized a change in the competencies
in DS-10 were of particular interest for the follow-up questions DS-
11 and DS-12. We received 11 open-ended responses to DS-11, which
asked for the new relevant competencies to professionally
develop software with GenAI tools. Within these responses, we
identified several themes. It should be noted that some of these
themes had occurred within the responses of educators.

• Same skills/Shifting importance. Not necessarily new com-
petencies, but shifting focus on understanding of concepts, e. g.,
“there’s a bigger need to understand underlying concepts”

• Accelerating skilled programmers. Successfully use GenAI
tools to increase productivity, at least for simple tasks, e. g., “lever-
age GenAI tools to improve productivity”, “using the speed for solv-
ing simple/generic problems.”

• Knowing about general limitations. Know the strengths and
weaknesses of GenAI tools, e. g., “accounting for hallucinations
from GenAI.”

• Evaluating GenAI use and its output. Evaluate, if it is ap-
propriate to (not) use GenAI tools for a specific problem, e. g.,
“knowing the sorts of problems that GenAI can be useful to solve is
important”, “Being able to determine if autocompletions are actu-
ally useful.”

• Prompting as a new skill. Prompting GenAI to generate useful
and appropriate responses, e. g., “prompting AI with appropriate
context to receive relevant/valid responses.”

• Meticulousness. Paying attention to detail (being meticulous)
when checking generated code, e. g., “I need to carefully examine
the output of Copilot [...] and I often have to make small edits to its
output.”
The second competency-related follow-up question for develop-
ers (DS-12, n=9) asked for competencies that were perceived as
no longer or less relevant to professionally develop software with
GenAI tools. We identified the following themes in the responses:

• Know everything. Know syntax and other elements of program-
ming languages by heart, e. g., “Less need for specific knowledge;
eg language specific nuances.”

• Know and use other sources. Using other external resources,
e. g., “searching stack overflow or other non-official help or docu-
mentation (official docs still has some usage).”

• Tolerating high levels of frustration. Being purpose-driven
or persistent despite frustration, e. g., “The competence not to
be easily frustrated if the first hit on Google does not provide the
answer to the problem.”

• None. None of the previous acquired competencies are perceived
as irrelevant e. g., “I see no competencies that are less relevant”,
“It’s a good starting point, nothing else.”
Interestingly, when asked about what advice developers would
give to novice programmers regarding the use of GenAI tools (DS-13
and DS-16, n=18), many responses related to the responses to DS-11.
The analysis of the open-ended responses revealed the following
themes, which repeat some of the competencies mentioned before:

• Evaluating GenAI use and its output. Evaluate, if it is ap-
propriate to (not) use GenAI tools for a specific problem, e. g.,
“Find the right use cases for GenAI but don’t trust it. Verification is
crucial.”, “Don’t simply trust them.”

Beyond the Hype

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

• Meticulousness. Paying attention to detail (being meticulous),
e. g., “always read back over the code the ai recommends: sometimes
it is not entirely correct”

• Prompting as a new skill. Prompting GenAI to generate useful
and appropriate responses, e. g., “learn how to speak AIs language
but also learn enough domain knowledge that lets you adequately
explain your needs to an AI.”
The recommendations by developers are somewhat divided be-
tween using GenAI tools to learn and get comfortable with them –
and not using them:
• Resist using GenAI. Do not use GenAI tools as a novice pro-
grammer, e. g., “Don’t.”, “Please take the time to learn to be an
algorithmic thinker yourself. Try the problem on your own ”, “Learn
the basics of programming without GenAI.”

• Rarely use GenAI. Use GenAI, but rarely, e. g., “learn to work
without them as much as you can”, “There’s value in not needing
it”, “Don’t lean on it too heavily.”

• Critically use GenAI. Use GenAI tools, but always be critical
of the output “Use it to start out, but still need to read over the
code that you write to understand it.”, “Use it to learn languages
(explain what existing code is doing) but know that it’s nowhere
near perfect.”

• Excel at using GenAI. Use GenAI tools, and become more
productive, e. g., “Start using it early and get comfortable with
leveraging it as a way to code faster.”
It should be noted though that the last comment was the ex-
ception. The majority of the comments highlighted the need for
a critical use of GenAI tools, and many comments were in favor
of learning the basics of programming without GenAI to avoid
over-reliance early on respective tools.

The interviews further reveal that educators are grappling with
how GenAI tools are reshaping students’ competencies in comput-
ing education. One of the most commonly discussed shifts is the
reduced emphasis on writing code from scratch and the growing
importance of reading and understanding pre-existing code (or
code written by GenAI tools). Educators believe that as GenAI tools
provide students with ready-made solutions, the ability to critically
evaluate and modify this code becomes more essential. Further-
more, higher-level cognitive skills, such as problem decomposition,
task specification, and computational thinking, are emphasized as
essential competencies that students must develop to navigate the
evolving landscape of AI-assisted programming. Several intervie-
wees also highlight the necessity of integrating communication
skills, such as explaining one’s code, into course objectives to en-
sure that students genuinely understand what they create rather
than merely generating functional code.

“I think potentially, students will start knowing less
about how computers work. Right? As these tools evolve,
we’re potentially having students that come in with less
knowledge at that level, but more capability at higher
levels.”
“I think with these tools, people are going to spend more
time reading because they’re gonna get help. They’re
gonna get assistance from these tools. It’s gonna give
them code. People are gonna need to read it and under-
stand it.”

Moreover, prompt engineering is emerging as a new core com-
petency. Educators are increasingly aware that these models can do
much of the "heavy lifting" in coding, but students must learn how
to ask the right questions and interpret AI-generated outputs to suc-
ceed. Some express concerns that students might bypass key stages
of the problem-solving process, such as task decomposition, which
could lead to gaps in their understanding. While many educators
see these shifts as an opportunity to teach more advanced and meta-
cognitive skills, there is also a concern that students may lose touch
with foundational computing concepts. Ultimately, the consensus is
that GenAI is pushing educators to rethink their course objectives
and better prepare students for a world where interacting with AI
is a critical part of the programming process.

“At the end of the day, we want students to practice task
decomposition. So how should AI be used? Hopefully, it
should help them develop those skills.”

5.9 RQ9 – Equity
As a part of the survey study, educators were asked whether they
teach at an institution that serves a minority population in their
country (ES-26). 23.7 % (18 out of 76) of educators report teaching
at an institution serving a minority population. However, 30.3 % (23
out of 76) are not sure whether it applies to their institution (one
participant did not answer this question). Due to these relatively
low response rates and insecurity among the participants, we did
not analyze the data any further with regard to GenAI teaching
practices and instructional approaches and whether and how they
differ depending on the educators’ institutions.

In the interviews, educators raised significant concerns regarding
the equity implications of GenAI tools in education. Many pointed
out that access to these tools is often tied to financial resources, both
at the individual and institutional levels. For instance, students from
wealthier backgrounds or universities may have access to premium
tools such as Microsoft Copilot, while others may have limited or
no access. This disparity could exacerbate existing inequalities, as
students with better tools may accelerate their learning, leaving
behind those with fewer resources.

“ChatGPT-like technologies are not a silver bullet to help
the poor students get better.”

The issue extends beyond financial access; educators also high-
lighted that not all students possess the meta-cognitive skills re-
quired to use these tools effectively. Those who are more capable
of self-regulation may benefit from AI tools, while students lacking
these skills might misuse them, producing correct outputs without
learning the underlying processes.

“[N]ot all students are equipped with the Metacognitive
skills to use these sorts of unconstrained tools produc-
tively.”

Additionally, linguistic and cognitive barriers were flagged as
potential equity concerns. Non-native English speakers and stu-
dents with lower literacy skills might struggle with AI-generated
responses, which are often complex to read and comprehend. As
such, AI tools could exacerbate difficulties in comprehension and
critical thinking.

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

James Prather et al.

“For students whose first language isn’t English, they
may struggle more with interpreting the AI-generated
responses, which could create another layer of disad-
vantage.”

Furthermore, students with disabilities, particularly those rely-
ing on assistive technologies like text-to-speech tools, may face
challenges in interacting with GenAI.

“we’ll have students with various disabilities in classes
who will be watching their peers use it in some senior-
level software engineering or capstone course, and they’ll
be charging forward much, much faster to do this. But
like, we’ll have text-to-speech issues for people who have
motor impairments who can’t type where they’re doing
speech to text to do text entry for some large language
model, or they have a speech impediment. And so the
speech recognition for the model doesn’t work very well,
and then they can’t actually just get precise enough
prompts into the system.”

While some educators noted efforts to mitigate these issues, such
as providing institutional licenses or designing tools for broader
access, the overall sentiment was that AI tools, at present, risk
amplifying existing inequities rather than alleviating them.

5.10 RQ10 – Future
The future of GenAI in education, particularly in computer science,
is seen as both an opportunity and a challenge. Interviewees gener-
ally agree that AI will continue to reshape the landscape, but the
extent of its influence remains uncertain.

“I think if we really were honest with ourselves about
new learning outcomes and wanting students to demon-
strate proficiency. Working with these models. It would
be good if we actually had some assessments where they
were allowed to do that.”

Many educators foresee GenAI becoming an integral part of
the classroom, assisting in various ways, from automating tedious
tasks such as grading and creating assessments, to dynamically
analyzing student code and providing real-time feedback. Some
interviewees suggested that AI could cluster student submissions
to provide more tailored feedback, saving time for instructors while
offering more personalized learning experiences.

“One interesting project. . . is to make a conversational
agent that takes students’ programs as input and then
ensures they have learned what they need to learn.”

However, the consensus is that while these advancements have
the potential to greatly improve education, careful planning and
continuous adaptation are necessary to ensure that AI is used ef-
fectively and equitably.

Several interviewees also envision a future where learning out-
comes and assessments shift to accommodate AI’s growing role.
Instead of focusing purely on coding, students might be evaluated
on how well they interact with AI tools to solve complex problems,
emphasizing prompt engineering and problem decomposition. The
challenge lies in balancing AI’s capabilities with the need to pre-
serve essential skills, such as critical thinking and deep learning,

which are at risk if students rely too heavily on AI. Many inter-
viewees expressed hope that AI would free up educators to focus
on higher-level teaching tasks, fostering stronger teacher-student
relationships and creating more meaningful, engaging learning
environments. At the same time, they acknowledged that this fu-
ture is still unfolding, and much of the educational community is
cautiously experimenting with how best to integrate these new
tools.

6 Discussion
In this section, we discuss some of the most interesting findings of
the present study in an integrated manner. The discussion is thus
led by themes and findings, and not by the research methods used
to gather them.

Changing Competencies. Several interesting insights emerged
from the educator survey. The majority of faculty (77 %) believe
the skills to write software have changed because of the advent
of LLMs, but less than half (36 %) have changed their courses to
include GenAI. Perhaps those who feel the skills have changed, but
have not changed their courses to include GenAI, have changed
their courses in other ways. Regardless, an increasing number of
instructors are adopting (or at least not banning) GenAI in their
courses compared to prior studies [49, 111]. In the present study,
we see about 30 % of educators actively integrating GenAI, and 75 %
acknowledge it in their class. It is not a total change but a clear
trend.

We also found that educators who are changing their courses
to incorporate LLMs are focusing on the new competencies, such
as prompting (ES-5, see Subsection 5.8). Based on the results of
the literature review, there are differences in how well generative
AI can support different tasks in computing courses. For example,
studies that used it for code comprehension reported more positive
findings compared to studies that used it for hint generation or
code writing.

Lastly, recognizing that LLMs can solve take-home assignments,
faculty are allocating more course grades on proctored assessments
and creating more, or new, proctored assignments.

In the educator survey, educators are divided about how compe-
tencies are changing. Most educators report that they believe the
skills to write software are either changing or shifting in some way
as a result of LLMs and GenAI. In contrast, a minority of educators
report believing either that there has been no change to compe-
tencies, or that students still need to develop certain programming
competencies and skills before they should start to work with/use
GenAI tools. Educators who see a shift in competencies feel we are
shifting away from code writing to code reading; toward higher
level skills like creativity, problem understanding, problem spec-
ification, problem decomposition, and software architecture; and
toward evaluating/testing and debugging.

Reasons for Disallowing GenAI. Educators disallowing the
use of GenAI provide two main reasons, (1) their own (at least
perceived) lack of skills and competencies regarding the concept
and use of GenAI, and (2) their attitude that the students would not
have the necessary skills and should, therefore, learn the basics of
programming first without any support of GenAI. Further research
is needed to determine whether this attitude is pedagogically sound

Beyond the Hype

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

or whether using GenAI can make it easier for beginners to learn
programming — and if so, in what ways it may even enhance learn-
ing (these ways may relate to the shift in competencies discussed
earlier).

Gap between Educators Expectations and Developers Ac-
tual Use of GenAI. We further noted some differences between
the use of GenAI tools among developers and how educators think
developers are using GenAI tools. More educators expected devel-
opers to use GenAI for certain tasks than developers reported. This
applied to the following tasks: Modeling algorithms, getting started
with problem solving, generating ideas, debugging, creating docu-
mentation/comments, finding resources/documentation/libraries,
providing code examples, and generation of test cases (cf. Figure 8).
Modifying code was the only task where developers exceeded educa-
tors’ expectations of GenAI use. It is thus important for computing
education to regularly connect to industry practices and to not
lose track of the competencies needed in the workplace. Despite
these differences regarding expectations and actual use, the survey
results alone show that GenAI tools are indeed used by developers
for a great number of different tasks.

Developers’ Use of and Trust in GenAI Tools. The survey
with professional software developers further revealed that GenAI
is used for getting started, debugging, code cleanup, and not having
to read documentation (cf. Subsection 5.7, question DS-4).

Even though only 39 professional developers took part in our
survey, the results are in line with larger surveys, e. g., the Stack-
Overflow 2024 survey with professional developers and their AI
usage (see [105], conducted in May 2024, filtered for professional
developers). It should be noted that the number of responses greatly
varied among questions which is why we also provide the absolute
numbers of responses in the following. In the StackOverflow survey,
about 63 % of about 46,000 professional developers state that they
use GenAI (vs. 79.5 % in our survey) and about 23 % state that they
do not use GenAI and do not plan to do so in the future. About 83 %
of about 28,500 developers see an increase in productivity and 58 %
a greater efficiency. This number matches the 81 % of developers
in our survey who see an increase of efficiency when using GenAI
tools.

The StackOverflow survey further shows that developers are split
about whether they trust AI output: about 41 % have (some) trust in
AI and about 31 % have (some) distrust in the accuracy. Furthermore,
about 45 % of the developers in the StackOverflow study think AI
tools are bad or very bad on complex tasks. Both aspects are also
reflected in comments in our survey. Hence, programming skills
are still required to spot such issues and creating complex software.
The top ethical concerns that the majority of developers stated in
the StackOverflow survey are “misinformation and disinformation
in AI results” (79 %) and issues with “source attribution” (65 %). This
may contradict our result that about 62 % of the developers in our
study found GenAI not harmful, but may also be caused by the way
the ethical concerns were collected in the StackOverflow survey
(i. e., via a closed question).

Equity Concerns. With standard industry tools being used by
all educators who participated in our survey, we are concerned
about how these tools may negatively impact equity among stu-
dents. For example, we cannot neglect the cost of using GenAI tools.
Considering a standard three- or four-year program (undergraduate

degree in Europe or the US) and a monthly cost of 20 US dollars per
month, this may amount to about one-thousand US dollars. Access
alone may thus be another financial burden for students with an
already tight budget.

According to the educator survey (ES-15), educators seem to
expect students to use the free version of standard industry tools.
However, we did not ask them whether they have any knowledge
of students using the paid versions regardless, and how that may
have had an impact on their outcomes or exam results. When be-
ing used for take-home tasks or assignments, educators have no
control whatsoever on students’ tool use. Even in the classroom,
some students will have the resources to access GenAI easily via
their smartphone, while others will not. For this reason, we rec-
ommend educators to carefully consider how and for which tasks
they incorporate GenAI tools from an equity lens to not disadvan-
tage any of their students. In related work, it has been shown that
students with various prior knowledge and education use GenAI
tools differently in introductory programming classes, and they
have varying success rates [69]. Similarly, we are only beginning to
understand the persisting inequities between GenAI technologies
and the accessibility needs of people with disabilities [4].

Need for Educators’ Professional Development. An impor-
tant finding of the educator survey is that many educators have
not yet considered the potential risks of GenAI in depth or the
benefits that GenAI tools can bring to their courses or students.
On the one hand, educators stated that they have not yet famil-
iarized themselves with GenAI, usually due to a lack of time, and
therefore do not incorporate or allow GenAI in their courses. On
the other hand, they seemed to have fixed attitudes about whether
GenAI is beneficial to students or not. If we assume that they have
hardly worked with GenAI, this attitude is based less on facts than
opinions. This lack of familiarity with GenAI tools may also help
explain why some of the responding educators had no clear ideas
about using GenAI in their courses in a pedagogically meaningful
way. The following quote in response to survey question ES-20
represents this challenge:

“I haven’t yet investigated the Generative AI tools. I’m
observant and beginning to research and use the tools
currently myself first to try to understand the realm of
what can be done and how it can be integrated. I want
to see how to scale the integration of the tools. I want to
preserve the integrity of learning but still keep new and
developing technologies viable because they are now in
society, but I need examples for the classroom.”

Another consequence of not having explored GenAI tools is
that educators may not be fully aware of the risks and potential
harm, meaning they are unable to discuss it critically with their
students. These barriers to adoption should be addressed more
intensively by professional development courses and pedagogical
training opportunities at all levels of computing education.

Future Developments. As we consider the future, we also
speculate on potential use cases for generative AI (GenAI) tools.
Currently, most GenAI tools primarily rely on text-based interac-
tions. However, current GenAI tools can already generate additional
modalities, such as images, audio, and video. A future tool might,

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

James Prather et al.

for example, be able to analyze a plot created by a student and
identify if certain data points have been omitted.

We also expect that GenAI tools will become more personalized.
A GenAI tool tailored to a specific course could recognize that
students are developing new skills as they progress and adjust its
generated results accordingly, avoiding advanced language features
until they have been introduced by the instructor. Additionally, a
GenAI tool personalized for an individual student might identify
specific content areas where the student needs further assistance
and direct them to relevant course materials to address any miscon-
ceptions, or even generate such personalized materials on the fly,
targeted towards the individual student’s educational needs (see
also [63, 88, 124]).

7 Threats to Validity
The present work has some limitations that need to be considered.
In the following, we outline the threats to validity of the respective
methodologies, the data and its analysis and interpretation.

7.1 Systematic Literature Review
Regarding the systematic literature review, it should be noted that
we did not check every available database in the context of comput-
ing education. However, we are confident that the applied method-
ology suffices in representing the state-of-the-art literature. Due
to the cut-off date, some publications appearing around that date
may also be missing, as arXiv, for example, can have delays in the
process due to its moderation system. Another limitation related to
the arXiv search is that it only allowed the title and abstract to be
used for the search.

Related to the analysis on the nature of findings, we acknowl-
edge that there is likely publication bias, which should be taken
into account. Studies with positive findings could more likely be
accepted for publication (or written up by the authors in the first
place), which could inflate the number of included studies that
reported positive results.

7.2 Educator and Developer Surveys
We invited the participants of both surveys through several mailing
lists to draw a broad sample of educators and computing profession-
als. However, it is possible that some educators on these mailing
lists are more involved in CS education than their peers and, given
the acute impact of GenAI over the past few year(s), may have
spent more time thinking through the implications of GenAI. To
mitigate this, we also encouraged recipients of our emails to share
the survey with others. Moreover, we noted that many potential
respondents dropped out of the survey after seeing the consent
form. It might have had a discouraging effect as participants had to
sign a form to proceed.

Regarding the developer survey, it is possible that the respon-
dents are not typical software developers, as they could be more
interested in developments in academia and the development of
tools. Moreover, we recognize that we are computing education
researchers who do not have access to developers within large tech
companies worldwide, which explains the low number of (full) re-
sponses. To mitigate this issue, we correlated our results with other
research initiated by industry.

A limitation that applies to both surveys is that of self-reporting,
meaning participants may have exaggerated, omitted information,
or expressed thoughts they believe are socially desired. To some-
what mitigate this limitation, we included both open-ended and
closed response options, and triangulated the survey data with the
data gathered via the interviews with educators.

7.3 Interview Study
Regarding the interviews with educators, it should be noted that
the sample may not be indicative of the computing education com-
munity. For example, interviewees were recruited in English, and
the interviews were also conducted in English only.

Another limitation is, again, related to self-reporting, which may
involve subjective representations, exaggerations, omissions, or
socially desirable statements.

8 Conclusions
The present working group report aimed to address two overarching
goals: (1) identifying how and why instructors incorporate GenAI
tools into their teaching, and (2) outline how the competencies and
skills in software developments changed and will change further
in the future due to GenAI. To address these goals, we applied a
mixed-methods design comprising a systematic literature review
(SLR), a survey for computing educators and developers in the
software industry, and semi-structured interviews with computing
educators.

8.1 Systematic Literature Review
The SLR focused on the reported evidence of GenAI in CER, more
specifically on the types of class interventions used and whether
findings have been positive or not. We then chose the search strings
and databases (ASEE PEER, arXiv, Scopus, ACM Digital Library,
and IEEE Xplore). After filtering of the papers based on inclusion
and exclusion criteria, the main characteristics of the papers was
extracted. This lead to the final set of 71 papers that were included
in the literature review. The findings of the literature review suggest
that thus far, generative AI has mostly been studied in unsupervised
conditions, such as having students use it for homework. Generative
AI has mostly been used for writing code, code comprehension,
automatic hints and generating learning resources. Most commonly,
students were not instructed on how to use generative AI, and
were directed to use general tools such as ChatGPT. However, we
did find that there are many custom tools available. These often
include some sort of pedagogical guardrails aimed to make the use
of generative AI more productive for learning.

Related to the nature of the findings, we found that studies that
used custom tools that included some instructor scaffolding (e. g.,
pedagogical guardrails) more often reported positive findings. How-
ever, this was only the case when students were not given explicit
instructions or guidance on how to use generative AI. Thus, based
on the findings of the literature review, it can be recommended
that instructors should either guide students on how to use gen-
erative AI if the tools used are general purpose (such as ChatGPT
or Gemini), or alternatively use custom tools that include scaffold-
ing (such as guardrails that, e. g., guide the model to provide more
educationally appropriate responses).

Beyond the Hype

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

8.2 Educator and Developer Views
We designed a survey for educators and software developers to
capture perspectives on competencies and skills required for future
graduates of computing. Precisely, we wanted to gather the edu-
cator’s perspective on using and teaching the use of GenAI tools
to their students, which tools are used, policies that need to be
considered or developed, and their motivations to integrate GenAI
(RQ1-RQ6). Moreover, we wanted to identify the impact of GenAI
on students’ competencies (RQ8), equitable conditions for learning
(RQ9), and future perspectives (RQ10).

Another goal was gathering the industry perspective (RQ7) of
generative AI usage, so we developed a survey emphasizing the
experiences and reflections of software developers regarding GenAI
tools. This includes both their use pattern but also potential harm
being done by using GenAI. In addition, we also compared educator
perspectives on industry usage with industry reports. The main
conclusions related to the educators’ and developers’ perspectives
are summarized in the grey box.

To elaborate on the educator perspective, we further used semi-
structured interviews with tool creators and experienced educators
studying or using GenAI on how they developed or integrated re-
spective tools. The interviews addressed the research questions
regarding actual student outcomes (RQ6), changing competencies
(RQ8), and how GenAI shapes the future of computing education
(RQ10). We found that educators are already seeing both the nega-
tive and positive impacts of GenAI from student use of these tools.
Despite intentional planning for integration into their courses, in-
structors and noticing a large influx in both cheating and student
unpreparedness for exams. However, students who use these tools
responsibly are able to accomplish more than traditionally possi-
ble, especially in introductory courses. Instructors also highlighted
the importance of GenAI tools in expanding assistance to students
through help-seeking tools, allowing them to ask questions with-
out the social risk of doing so in front of peers. While some might
lament these uses as a degradation of student knowledge, many
instructors who are already using GenAI in their courses see it
as something that deprecates certain previously required compe-
tencies and enables new ones. Whether or not that’s true, most
instructors shared the belief that competencies are currently in
flux and that computing education is rapidly shifting to meet the
occasion.

9 Future Work
Building upon the presented results, there are several pathways
for future work. For example, we could replicate the systematic
literature review in other domains beyond computing education
and compare the CER community’s perspective to those of other
domains, e. g., teacher education, other engineering disciplines,
or even less technical domains. The same applies to the survey
and interviews with educators. It would be interesting to identify
differences and overlaps in how educators across domains integrate
and perceive GenAI tools in their teaching practices.

The systematic literature review shows that research has focused
on developing GenAI tools to help computer science students with
tasks like writing code, understanding code, and receiving feedback
and hints for programming problems. These tools are a natural

Key takeaways from our results include:
• GenAI impacts educators and developers: 80 % of developers
use GenAI tools in their professional roles (DS-1) with those not
using it citing either ethical concerns or company limitations in its
use. At the same time, 75 % of educators acknowledge that the skills
to program are changing as a result of GenAI (ES-3) and 30 % of
educators are integrating it into their classes (ES-2). In contrast, only
22 % of educators are explicitly disallowing GenAI use (ES-1). Given
the wide availability of GenAI tools for students, we are heartened
that instructors are adapting to the new reality and not attempting
to ban what effectively cannot be banned.

• GenAI changes assessments: Educators are increasing the weight-
ing of exams (ES-22), exploring alternative invigilated exam tech-
niques (including oral exams), and are emphasizing assessing the
process of learning over correctness of answers.

• GenAI changes programming competencies: The majority of sur-
veyed educators (75 %) believe program competencies have changed
as a result of GenAI (ES-3). Of the remaining 25 %, many felt that the
skills to program have remained the same, however, the importance
of some skills have shifted (ES-4). Educators believe code reading
has become more important than writing code from scratch, and
that higher level skills like code testing, problem decomposition,
problem understanding, and debugging have become more essential
(ES-4, ES-5). When given options to rank, educators chose problem
understanding, reading code, and problem decomposition as the most
important skills for programming with GenAI. Developers pointed
out a similar shift (DS-10), but added the need to critically evaluate
GenAI use and its output, writing prompts, and meticulousness as new
relevant competency components.

• Need to train students to use GenAI in industry: GenAI tools are
almost ubiquitous in industry. Educators need to train students for
industry so they are successful in their career. To achieve this goal,
it is crucial to keep an open eye on recent developments regarding
GenAI and job ads, and cooperate with industry partners so that
educators and institutions can align their curricula, competency
expectations, and study programs [66, 70, 150].

• Guide students on how to use GenAI or use custom tools: Based
on the results of the literature review, studies reported more positive
results when students were provided with guidance on how to use
GenAI tools or used custom tools that include pedagogical guardrails.
• Teach (educators) and students about GenAI challenges: Criti-
cally using GenAI is crucial according to educators and developers.
It is therefore important to teach students about the limitations and
issues of current GenAI tools (e. g., ethical aspects, biases, plagiarism,
etc.) so they can make informed decisions. For that to happen, educa-
tors need to receive relevant training. Our educator survey showed
that those educators who did not integrate GenAI cited the lack of
time, skills, pedagogical training, support, or resources as reasons
for non-use (ES-20).

extension of existing GenAI tools like ChatGPT, which excel at
solving problems in introductory computer science courses but
struggle with guiding students to find answers on their own without
giving away the solution entirely. Looking forward, we should
consider how GenAI could address other challenges in learning
to program. One possible area is debugging. Expert tutors often
guide students to use debugging techniques like print statements,
debuggers, or searching Stack Overflow. A key question is how
future GenAI tools can effectively incorporate best practices, and

ITiCSE-WGR 2024, July 8–10, 2024, Milan, Italy

James Prather et al.

how they can actually support learning processes, scaffolding, or,
for example, mastery learning. The role of human tutors is also
important as GenAI tools become more capable of using teaching
methods like the Socratic method without giving away solutions.
This raises the question of what effective teaching looks like for
instructors and how we should train them to help students in a
GenAI-supported environment.

Another crucial aspect of future work is the impact of GenAI
tools on the job market, and, for example, the qualifications of
graduates. Are there going to be fewer entry-level software engi-
neering jobs? To date, we know from studies that CS students and
developers are using GenAI at a great scale, and even educators are
increasingly integrating it into their courses. It is thus important to
regularly investigate and align these recent developments.

Figure 10: Working Group 09 in Milan, Italy.

Data Availability
The data of the systematic literature review is published on OSF:
https://osf.io/wpxjb/?view_only=cebf366db7f5423792b39de754972400.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Research Council of Finland
(Academy Research Fellow grant number 356114) and in part by
the U.S. National Science Foundation IUSE Award #2417374.

We also acknowledge the support by the Google Award for In-

clusion Research Program.

Finally, we want to say “Thank You” to all of our interview and
survey participants. In particular, we acknowledge those educators
who participated in our interviews who agreed to be named (in
alphabetical order by surname):

• Bita Akram
• Kevin D. Ashley
• Brett Becker
• Yan Chen
• Paul Denny
• Barbara Ericson
• Majeed Kazemitabaar
• Amy Ko
• Lauren Margulieux
• Tereza Novotna
• Wesley Oliver
• Ray Pettit
• Brad Sheese

We acknowledge and thank the participation of several others who
participated in the interviews who requested to remain anonymous.

References

[1] Amy Adair. 2023. Teaching and Learning with AI: How Artificial Intelligence
is Transforming the Future of Education. XRDS 29, 3 (apr 2023), 7–9. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3589252

[2] Vibhor Agarwal, Madhav Krishan Garg, Sahiti Dharmavaram, and Dhruv Kumar.
2024. "Which LLM should I use?": Evaluating LLMs for tasks performed by
Undergraduate Computer Science Students. arXiv:2402.01687 [cs.CY] https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2402.01687

[3] Jana Al Hajj and Melike Sah. 2023. Assessing the Impact of ChatGPT in a
PHP Programming Course. In 2023 7th International Symposium on Innovative
Approaches in Smart Technologies (ISAS). IEEE, New York, NY, USA, 1–10. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ISAS60782.2023.10391549

[4] Bedour Alshaigy and Virginia Grande. 2024. Forgotten Again: Addressing Acces-
sibility Challenges of Generative AI Tools for People with Disabilities. In Adjunct
Proceedings of the 2024 Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (Upp-
sala, Sweden) (NordiCHI ’24 Adjunct). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, Article 68, 6 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3677045.3685493
[5] Sara Amani, Lance White, Trini Balart, Laksha Arora, Dr. Kristi J. Shryock,
Dr. Kelly Brumbelow, and Dr. Karan L. Watson. 2023. Generative AI Percep-
tions: A Survey to Measure the Perceptions of Faculty, Staff, and Students on
Generative AI Tools in Academia. arXiv:2304.14415

[6] Sihem Amer-Yahia, Angela Bonifati, Lei Chen, Guoliang Li, Kyuseok Shim, Jian-
liang Xu, and Xiaochun Yang. 2023. From Large Language Models to Databases
and Back: A Discussion on Research and Education. SIGMOD Rec. 52, 3 (nov
2023), 49–56. https://doi.org/10.1145/3631504.3631518

[7] Matin Amoozadeh, David Daniels, Daye Nam, Aayush Kumar, Stella Chen,
Michael Hilton, Sruti Srinivasa Ragavan, and Mohammad Amin Alipour. [n.d.].
Trust in Generative AI among Students: An Exploratory Study. In Proceed-
ings of the 55th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 1
(New York, NY, USA, 2024-03-07) (SIGCSE 2024). Association for Computing
Machinery, 67–73. https://doi.org/10.1145/3626252.3630842

[8] Karen Anewalt and Jennifer Polack. 2023. Industry Trends in Software Engi-
neering: Alumni Perspectives. Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges 39, 3
(2023), 159–170. https://doi.org/10.5555/3636988.3637014

[9] Chaitanya Arora, Utkarsh Venaik, Pavit Singh, Sahil Goyal, Jatin Tyagi, Shyama
Goel, Ujjwal Singhal, and Dhruv Kumar. 2024. Analyzing LLM Usage in an
Advanced Computing Class in India. arXiv:2404.04603 https://arxiv.org/abs/
2404.04603

[10] Imen Azaiz, Oliver Deckarm, and Sven Strickroth. 2023. AI-enhanced Auto-
Correction of Programming Exercises: How Effective is GPT-3.5? International
Journal of Engineering Pedagogy (iJEP) 13, 8 (Dec. 2023), 67–83. https://doi.org/
10.3991/ijep.v13i8.45621

[11] Imen Azaiz, Natalie Kiesler, and Sven Strickroth. 2024. Feedback-Generation for
Programming Exercises With GPT-4. In Proceedings of the 2024 on Innovation
and Technology in Computer Science Education V. 1 (Milan, Italy) (ITiCSE 2024).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 31–37. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3649217.3653594

[12] Rishabh Balse, Viraj Kumar, Prajish Prasad, and Jayakrishnan Madathil Warriem.
2023. Evaluating the Quality of LLM-Generated Explanations for Logical Errors
in CS1 Student Programs. In Proceedings of the 16th Annual ACM India Compute
Conference (Hyderabad, India) (COMPUTE ’23). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 49–54. https://doi.org/10.1145/3627217.3627233
[13] Jose Barambones, Cristian Moral, Angélica de Antonio, Ricardo Imbert, Loïc
Martínez-Normand, and Elena Villalba-Mora. 2024. ChatGPT for Learning HCI
Techniques: A Case Study on Interviews for Personas. IEEE Transactions on
Learning Technologies 17 (2024), 1486–1501. https://doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2024.
3386095

[14] Erik Barendsen, Violetta Lonati, Keith Quille, Rukiye Altin, Monica Divitini,
Sara Hooshangi, Oscar Karnalim, Natalie Kiesler, Madison Melton, Calkin Suero
Montero, and Anna Morpurgo. 2024. AI in and for K-12 Informatics Education.
Life after Generative AI. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Virtual Global Computing
Education Conference V.2. https://doi.org/10.1145/3649409.3691073

[15] Shraddha Barke, Michael B James, and Nadia Polikarpova. 2023. Grounded
Copilot: How Programmers Interact with Code-Generating Models. Proceedings
of ACM on Programming Languages 7, OOPSLA1 (2023), 85–111. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3586030

[16] Brett A Becker, Michelle Craig, Paul Denny, Hieke Keuning, Natalie Kiesler,
Juho Leinonen, Andrew Luxton-Reilly, James Prather, and Keith Quille. 2024.
Generative AI in Introductory Programming. In Computer Science Curricula
2023, Amruth N. Kumar, Rajendra K. Raj, Sherif G. Aly, Monica D. Anderson,
Brett A. Becker, Richard L. Blumenthal, Eric Eaton, Susan L. Epstein, Michael
Goldweber, Pankaj Jalote, Douglas ¬Lea, Michael Oudshoorn, Marcelo Pias,
Susan Reiser, Christian Servin, Rahul Simha, Titus Winters, and Qiao Xiang
(Eds.). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 438–439.

