# Fuente
- archivo: 351-423.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/351-423.pdf
- extraido: 2026-03-26T16:16:03

# Contenido

Functional Programming Paradigm

11

In this chapter, we discuss the functional programming paradigm, where computation
proceeds by term rewriting and not through modiﬁcation of the state. Languages of
this paradigm, at least in their “pure” form, do not use the concept of memory (and
therefore there is no side effect). Once an environment is ﬁxed, an expression always
denotes the same value.

We will discuss the pure paradigm in the ﬁrst sections, explaining its fundamental
aspects. Real functional programming languages, however, merge these “pure” ingre-
dients with many other mechanisms; we will review some of them in Sect. 11.3. Also
most modern imperative languages incorporate constructs for a functional program-
ming style. We will conclude this ﬁrst part of the chapter discussing the reasons why
the functional programming paradigm has gained much interest in the last decades.
We will touch on the SECD machine, an abstract machine for higher-order func-

tional languages which is the prototype of many real implementations.

The chapter concludes with a more theoretical section that provides a succinct
introduction to the λ-calculus, a formal system for computability that inspires all
functional languages and which has, since the time of Algol and Lisp, been a
constant model for the design of programming languages.

11.1 Computing Without State

Conventional languages base their computational model on the transformation of the
state. The heart of this model is the concept of modiﬁable variable, that is, a container
with a name to which, during the computation, can be assigned different values, while
the same association is always maintained in the environment. Correspondingly,
the principal construct of conventional languages is assignment, which modiﬁes
the value of a variable, without changing the association between the name of the

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
M. Gabbrielli and S. Martini, Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms,
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34144-1_11

335

336

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

variable and the location to which it corresponds. In the terminology of Sect. 6.2.2, it
modiﬁes the r-value but not the l-value, which is ﬁxed when the variable is declared.
This conventional, “imperative” computational model is an abstract view of the
underlying physical machine, where computation proceeds by modifying values
stored in locations, according to the so-called von Neumann Machine model, named
after the Hungarian-American mathematician who, in the 1940s, was one of the
prominent designers of one of the ﬁrst electronic stored-program computers.

In pure functional languages, there is neither a state nor a modiﬁable variable. The
computation proceeds—at least in principle—by rewriting expressions, by changes
that take place only in the environment and do not involve the concept of memory. If
there are no modiﬁable variables, there is no longer a need for assignment. The entire
computation is expressed in terms of modiﬁcations to the environment in which the
manipulation of (higher-order, see Sect. 7.2) functions plays a fundamental role.

Without assignment, iteration becomes less important. A loop repeatedly modiﬁes
the state until the values of certain variables satisfy a guard. The reader already knows
(see Chap. 6) that iterative and recursive constructs are two equivalent mechanisms
permitting inﬁnitely long (and possibly divergent) computations. In the stateless
computation model, (unbounded) iteration disappears, recursion remains, becoming
the fundamental construct for sequence control. Bounded iteration is expressed via
higher-order functions, see Sect. 11.3.4.

Higher-order functions and recursion are the basic ingredients of this stateless
computational model, which is called the functional programming paradigm, as
opposed to the ordinary, state based imperative paradigm.

This is a paradigm as old as the imperative one. Since the 1930s, beside the
Turing Machine (see box on Sect. 3.4), there has existed the λ-calculus, an ab-
stract model for computable functions based on those same concepts we have been
brieﬂy explaining. Lisp was the ﬁrst programming language explicitly inspired by the
λ-calculus and many others have followed in the intervening years (Scheme, ML,
in all its different dialects, Miranda, Haskell, Erlang to name just a few of them).
Among these, only Miranda and Haskell are “purely functional”; the others also have
imperative components, although these languages assign a subordinate role to them.
We introduce ﬁrst the pure functional paradigm. To make the treatment more
concrete, we refer to a speciﬁc language rather than using a neutral pseudocode. ML
has been chosen for this because, through its coherence and elegance of design, it is
the most suited of them all to didactic presentation. It is not our aim to introduce the
language (for which, the reader should refer to the bibliography), but only to use the
syntax in an instrumental fashion to discuss some general questions that apply also
to other functional languages.

11.1.1 Expressions and Functions

In the usual mathematical practice, there is some ambiguity about when we are
deﬁning a function and when we are applying it to a value. It is not uncommon to
encounter expressions of the kind:

11.1 Computing Without State

337

Let f (x) = x 2 be the function that associates with x its square. If now we have x = 2, it
follows that f (x) = 4.

The syntactic expression f (x) is used to denote two things that are quite different:
the ﬁrst time, it serves to introduce the name, f , of a speciﬁc function; the second
time, it serves to denote the result of applying the function f to a speciﬁed value. In
mathematical practice, this ambiguity is completely innocuous because the context
helps us to distinguish which of the two uses is intended. The same does not hold for
an artiﬁcial language (such as a programming language) which describes functions.
Here, it is appropriate to distinguish the two cases.

When a mathematician asserts that they are deﬁning the function, f (x), in reality,
they are deﬁning the function f with one formal parameter, x, which serves to
indicate the transformation that f applies to its argument. To distinguish linguistically
between the name and the “body” of the function, following ML syntax, we can write:

val f = fn x = > x * x ;

The reserved word val introduces a declaration. The declaration is used to extend
the environment with a new association between a name and a value. In our case, the
name f is bound to the transformation of x into x ∗ x. In all functional languages,
functions are expressible values; that is, they can be the result of the evaluation of a
complex expression. In our case, the expression on the right of the = and introduced
by fn is an expression that denotes a function.

For the application of a function to an argument, we retain the traditional notation,
writing f(2) or (f 2), or f 2, for the expression that results from the application
of a function f to the argument 2. We can also use val to introduce new names, as
in:

val four = f 2;

The introduction of speciﬁc syntax for an expression which denotes a function
has an important consequence. It is possible to write (and possibly apply) a function
without having necessarily to assign it a name. For example, the expression

( fn y = > y +1) (6);

has the value 7 which results from the application of the (anonymous) function fn
y => y+1 to the argument 6. To make the notation less imposing, we assume (as
does ML) that application can be denoted by simple juxtaposition (that is without
parentheses) and that is associates to the left (preﬁx notation). If g is the name of a
function,

g a1 a2 ... ak

will mean:

( . . . ( ( g a1 ) a2 ) . . . ak ).

Nothing prevents one functional expression from appearing inside another, as in

val add = fn x = > ( fn y = > y + x );

338

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

The value add is a function which, given an argument, x, returns an anonymous
function which, given an argument y, returns x+y. We can use add in many different
ways:

val t h r e e = add 1 2;
val a d d t w o = add 2;
val f i v e = a d d t w o 3;

Note that, in particular, addtwo is a function which is obtained as the result of the
evaluation of another expression.

The notation which uses val and fn is important but is a little verbose. ML also
allows the use of a more compact notation which resembles the usual way of deﬁning
functions in a programming language. The ﬁrst function, f, which we deﬁned (the
one which computes the square of its argument) could also be deﬁned as follows:

fun f x = x * x ;

In general, a deﬁnition of the form:

fun F x1 x2 ... xn = body;

is only syntactic sugar (that is, in programming language jargon, only a nicer abbre-
viation) for:

val F = fn x1 = > ( fn x2 = > ... ( fn xn = > body ) . . . ) ;

As a last example of functions which manipulate functions, this time in the form

of a formal parameter, consider the deﬁnition:

fun comp f g x = f ( g ( x ));

This returns the function composed of its ﬁrst two arguments (which are, in their
turn, functions).

Finally, every functional program permits the deﬁnition of recursive functions.
Assuming that we have available a conditional expression (which in ML is written
with the familiar if then else syntax), we can deﬁne the usual factorial as:

fun fatt n = if n =0 then 1 else n * fatt (n -1);

11.1.2 Computation as Reduction

If we exclude arithmetic functions (which we can assume predeﬁned with the usual
semantics) and the conditional expression, at the conceptual level, we can describe
the procedure used to transform a complex expression into its value (evaluation) as
the process of rewriting. We call this process reduction. In a complex expression, a
subexpression of the form “function applied to an argument” is textually replaced by
the body of the function in which the formal parameter is replaced, in its turn, by the

11.1 Computing Without State

339

Fig. 11.1 Some deﬁnitions and a computation using rewriting

actual parameter.1 We can compute a simple expression using this computational
model (we use → to indicate a reduction step).
fact 3 → ( fn n = > if n =0 then 1 else n * fact (n -1)) 3

→ if 3=0 then 1 else 3* fact (3 -1)
→ 3* fact (3 -1)
→ 3* fact (2)
→ 3*(( fn n = > if n =0 then 1 else n * fact (n -1)) 2)
→ 3*( if 2=0 then 1 else 2* fact (2 -1))
→ 3*(2* fact (2 -1))
→ 3*(2* fact (1))
→ 3 * ( 2 * ( ( fn n = > if n =0 then 1 else n * fact ( n -1)) 1))
→ 3 * ( 2 * ( if 1=0 then 1 else 1* fact (1 -1))
→ 3 * ( 2 * ( 1 * fact (0))
→ 3 * ( 2 * ( 1 * ( ( fn n = > if n =0 then 1 else n * fact (n -1)) 0)))
→ 3 * ( 2 * ( 1 * ( if 0=0 then 1 else n * fact (n -1))))
→ 3 * ( 2 * ( 1 * 1 ) )
→ 6

Note how, with the exception of arithmetic calculations and the use of the condi-
tional expression, all of the rest of the computation proceeds by symbolic manipula-
tion of strings: no variables, no update of values on the execution stack. Figure 11.1
contains another example of pure symbolic manipulation. (It is a complicated way
to write the identity function!) (While studying the ﬁgure, recall that fun is just an
abbreviation for val ... fn.)

Finally, the reader will have no difﬁculty in convincing themselves that, given the

deﬁnition

fun r x = r ( r ( x ));

each computation that involves an evaluation of r resolves into an inﬁnite rewriting.
We say, in such a case, that the computation diverges and that the result is undeﬁned.

1 The reader will certainly have recognised in this description the “copy rule” we already discussed
in the context of the by-name parameter passing. For the time being, we will be vague about the
exact semantics to assign to this process—all of Sect. 11.2 will be devoted to it.

340

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

11.1.3 The Fundamental Ingredients

In these ﬁrst subsections, we have introduced the fundamental ingredients of the pure
functional paradigm. We can make this precise and summarise the main concepts in
the following way.

From the syntactic viewpoint, a pure functional language has no commands (there
being no state to modify using side effects) but only expressions. Apart from possible
values and primitive operators for data (such as integer, boolean, characters, etc.) and
the conditional expression, the two principal constructs for deﬁning expressions are:

• Abstraction which, given any expression, exp and an identiﬁer, x, allows the con-
struction of an expression fn x => exp denoting the function that transforms
the formal parameter x into exp (the expression exp is “abstracted” from the
speciﬁc value bound to x).

• The application of an expression, f_exp, to another expression, a_exp, which
we write f_exp a_exp, which denotes the application of the function (denoted
by) f_exp to the argument (denoted by) a_exp.

There are no constraints on the possibilities of passing functions as arguments
to other functions, or to returning functions as the results of other (higher-order)
functions. As a consequence, there is perfect homogeneity between programs and
data.

From the semantic viewpoint, a program consists of a series of value deﬁnitions,
each of which inserts a new association into the environment and can require the
evaluation of arbitrarily complex expressions. The presence of higher-order functions
and the possibility of deﬁning recursive functions makes this deﬁnition mechanism
ﬂexible and powerful.

To a ﬁrst approximation, the semantics of computation (evaluation) refers to no
linguistic aspects other than the ones introduced so far. It can be deﬁned using simple
symbolic rewriting of strings (reduction), which repeatedly uses two main operations
to simplify expressions until they reach a simple form which immediately denotes
a value. The ﬁrst of these operations is the simple search through the environment.
When an identiﬁer is determined as being bound in an environment, replace the
identiﬁer by its deﬁnition. For example, in Fig. 11.1, we used this operation for the
ﬁrst and the ﬁfth reduction. In what follows this step will not be explicitly considered
again. We will consider a name as a simple abbreviation for the value associated with
it.

The second operation, which is more interesting, deals with a functional expres-
sion applied to an argument and uses a version of the copy rule (which in this context
is called the β-rule).

Deﬁnition 11.1

Redex A redex (which stands for a reducible expression) is an application of the

form ((fn x => body) arg).

11.2 Evaluation

341

Reductum The reductum of a redex ((fn x => body) arg) is the expres-
sion which is obtained by replacing in body each (free) occurrence of the formal
parameter, x, by a copy of arg (avoiding variable capture,2 see Sect. 7.1.2).
β-rule An expression, exp, in which a redex appears as a subexpression is re-
duced (or rewrites, simpliﬁes) to exp1 (notation: exp → exp1), where exp1
is obtained from exp by replacing the redex by its reductum.

From an implementation viewpoint, ﬁnally, every abstract machine for functional
languages adopts extensive garbage-collection mechanisms because, in the case in
which functions are returned as values by other functions, we know that the local
environment must be preserved for an unlimited period of time (see Sect. 7.2.2).

If these are the cardinal notions of a functional language, on a more attentive
reading, these few lines raise more problems than they solve. We undertake a deeper
analysis of these concepts in the next section.

11.2 Evaluation

Last section leaves open at least two issues:

• What is the termination condition for reduction (that is what does “a simple form

which immediately denotes a value” mean?)

• What precise semantics must be given to the β-rule, not just concerning possible
variable capture (which we already described in the context of parameter passing)
but more importantly, the order to follow during rewriting, should more than one
redex be present in the same expression?

11.2.1 Values

A value is an expression which cannot be further rewritten. In a functional language,
there are values of two kinds: values of primitive type and functions. There is little
to say about values of simple types. If the language provides some primitive types
(integers, booleans, characters, etc.) is clear that each of these types come with a
set of values that do not admit evaluation (for example, constants of type integer,
boolean, characters, etc.). In the example of the previous subsection, we terminated
the evaluation of fact when we reached primitive values of integer type: 3, 2, 1.

2 In the context of functional programming, identiﬁers bound to values are often referred to as
“variables”. The reader is by now experienced enough to allow us to continue with this traditional
use without being confused by the absence of modiﬁable variables in pure functional programming
languages.

342

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

Functional values are more interesting. Let us consider the following deﬁnition:

val G = fn x = > (( fn y = > y +1) 2);

We have said that a deﬁnition entails the evaluation of the expression on the right of
the equality and, then, the binding of the value thus derived to the name on the left
of the =. But, in this case, it is not immediately clear what the value to be associated
with G is. Do we have:

fn x = > 3

in which we have rewritten the body of G by evaluating the redex it contains, or do
we have

fn x = > (( fn y = > y +1) 2)

in which there has been no evaluation in the body of G? The ﬁrst case appears to
be the one that more respects the informal semantics that we gave at the end of the
last subsection. The second, on the other hand, is closer to the usual meaning of a
function deﬁnition in imperative languages, in which the body of a function is only
evaluated when it is called.

Functional languages in common use all adopt the latter of these choices—there

is no evaluation “under” an abstraction. Every expression of the form

fn x = > exp

is a value, so redexes possibly contained in exp are never rewritten until the function
is applied to some argument.

11.2.2 Capture-Free Substitution

To implement capture-free substitution, we saw in Chap. 7 that closures can be
used. This is, in effect, the mechanism also used by abstract machines for functional
languages (see Sect. 11.5). For the elementary description we are giving at present,
though, a syntactic convention sufﬁces. In every expression, there are never two
formal parameters with the same name and the names of the possible variables that
are not formal parameters are all distinct from those of the formal parameters.

Using this convention, there will never be variable capture in the simple examples

that we consider.3

11.2.3 Evaluation Strategies

In Chap. 6, while discussing expressions, we saw how every language must ﬁx a
speciﬁc strategy (that is a ﬁxed order) for the evaluation of expressions. The presence

3 In the more general case, if we do not want to bring into play the concept of closure, for the correct
description of computation using rewriting, it is necessary to carefully deﬁne the concepts of bound
and free variable, and substitution, all concepts which we treat formally in Sect. 11.6.

11.2 Evaluation

Fig. 11.2 An expression
with more than one redex

343

of higher-order functions in functional languages makes this question even more
fundamental. To clarify the problem, consider the deﬁnitions in Fig. 11.2. Which
value is associated with v and how is it determined?

The β-rule on its own is not of much use because, in the right-hand part of the
deﬁnition of v, there are 4 redexes (after the expansion of the names with the values
associated with them by the deﬁnitions):

K ( D ( succ 0))
D ( succ 0)
succ 0
r 2

Which of them is reduced ﬁrst? Every commonly used language uses a leftmost
strategy which reduces the redexes starting with the one at the leftmost end. But
even having stipulated this, it is not clear which is the leftmost redex among

K ( D ( succ 0))
D ( succ 0)
succ 0

because these three redexes are superimposed on each other. Having ﬁxed a leftmost
evaluation order, there are three main different strategies.

Evaluation by Value

In evaluation by value (which is also called applicative-order, or eager, or innermost
evaluation), a redex is evaluated only if the expression which constitutes its argument
part is already a value. More precisely, leftmost evaluation in applicative order works
as follows.

1. Scan the expression to be evaluated from the left, choosing the ﬁrst application

encountered. Let it be (f_exp a_exp).

2. First evaluate (recursively applying this method) f_exp until it has been reduced

to a value (of functional type) of the form (fn x => ...).

3. Then evaluate the argument part, a_exp, of the application, so that it is reduced

to a value, val.

4. Reduce the redex ((fn x => ...)val) using the β-rule and repeat from (1).

Considering Fig. 11.2, case (1) ﬁrst chooses the application K (D (succ 0)).
Now some elementary applications of (1), (2) and (3) will serve to show that K, D and
succ are already values (recall that we are implying that a name is an abbreviation for
the expression associated with it). The ﬁrst redex to be reduced is then succ 0 (that

344

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

is, ((fn v => v + 1) 0)) which will be completely evaluated and yields 1.
Then the redex (D 1) (that is ((fn u => if u=0 then 1 else u) 1))
is reduced to give the value 1. Then (K 1) is evaluated to produce the value (fun
y ==> 1). At this point in the evaluation, the expression has become

( fun y = > 1) ( r 2)

Since the functional part of this application is already a value, the strategy pre-
scribes that the argument (r 2) is evaluated. An application of the β-rule leads to
r (r 2); we then proceed to r (r (r 2)) and so on in a divergent computation.

No value is therefore associated with v because the computation diverges.

Evaluation by Name

In the evaluation by name strategy (which is also called normal order or outer-
most evaluation), a redex is reduced without ﬁrst reducing its argument part. More
precisely, leftmost evaluation in normal order proceeds as follows.

1. Scan the expression to be evaluated from the left, choosing the ﬁrst application

encountered. Let it be (f_exp a_exp).

2. First evaluate f_exp (recursively applying this method) until it has been reduced

to a value (of functional type) of the form (fn x => ...).

3. Reduce the redex ((fn x => ..)a_exp) using the β-rule and repeat from

(1).

Considering Fig. 11.2, the ﬁrst redex to be reduced is therefore:

K ( D ( succ 0))

It is rewritten to:

fn y = > D ( succ 0)

which is a functional value. The full expression now is of the form:

( fn y = > D ( succ 0)) ( r 2)

for which the strategy prescribes reducing the outermost redex, so we obtain:

D ( succ 0)

Now reducing this expression, we obtain:

if ( succ 0)=0 then 1 else ( succ 0)

and then:

if 1=0 then 1 else ( succ 0)

and ﬁnally

succ 0

from which we obtain the ﬁnal value, 1, which is then associated with v.

11.2 Evaluation

Lazy Evaluation

345

In evaluation by name, a single redex might have to be evaluated more than once
because of some duplication that has occurred during rewriting. In the example that
we are discussing, the redex (succ 0) is duplicated because of the function D and
is reduced twice4 in the conditional expression that forms the body of D. This is
the price that must be paid for postponing the evaluation of an argument until after
the application of a function (and it is really this that allows evaluation by name
to obtain a value where evaluation by value would diverge). But it is expensive in
terms of efﬁciency (since the duplicated redex may require a signiﬁcant amount of
computation).

To obviate this problem and maintain the advantages of evaluation by name, the
lazy strategy proceeds like that by name but the ﬁrst time that a “copy” of a redex is
encountered, its value is saved and will be used should any other copies of the same
redex be encountered. Since there is no state, the evaluation of multiple copies of
the same expression will always terminate with the same value, hence guaranteeing
that the lazy strategy computes the same value of the strategy by name.

The by-name and lazy strategies are examples of call by need strategies in which

a redex is reduced only if it is required by the computation.

11.2.4 Comparison of the Strategies

In the last subsection, the by-name strategy produces a value when the by-value
strategy diverges. It is sensible to ask the question as to whether it can be the case
that the two strategies produce distinct values for the same expression.

An answer to this question is given by the following theorem which expresses
one of the most important properties of the pure functional paradigm. We say that
an expression in the language is closed if all of its variables are bound by some fn.
Let us recall, then, from Sect. 11.2.1, that by primitive value, we mean a value of
a primitive type (integer, boolean, character, etc.), excluding, therefore, functional
values.

Theorem 11.1 Let exp be a closed expression. If exp reduces to a primitive value,
val, using any of the three strategies of Sect. 11.2.3, then exp reduces to val
using the by-name strategy. If exp diverges using the by-name strategy, then it also
diverges under the other two strategies.

Let us note that the theorem excludes that a (closed) expression can yield a prim-
itive value, val, in one strategy and yield another primitive value, val2, using

4 The purist does not speak of copies of redexes but will rather say that the redex (succ 0) has
given way to two residuals, each of which has been reduced independently of the other.

346

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

another strategy.5 Two strategies can therefore differ only by the fact that one de-
termines a value while the other diverges, as we saw in our example. We cannot go
into the details of how the theorem can be proved but it is important to stress that the
following basic property is fundamental to its validity:

Once any strategy has been ﬁxed in a given environment, the evaluation of all occurrences
of a single expression always yields the same value.

This property, which is immediately falsiﬁed when there are side effects, is taken
by many authors as the criterion for a pure functional language: a language is purely
functional if it satisﬁes this condition. This is a very important property which makes
it possible to reason about a functional program and to which we will return in
Sect. 11.4. Let us again note, before going on, that it is just by virtue of this property
that lazy evaluation is correct. The value obtained by the evaluation of an expression
does not change when another copy of the same expression is encountered (clearly,
in the meanwhile, the environment has not been changed).

In the light of the preceding theorem, it can be asked what interest there is in the
by-value strategy, given that by-name is the most general of all possible strategies.
Moreover, reasons of efﬁciency would seem to suggest that we only adopt call-by-
need strategies, given that it is not clear why useless redexes should be reduced,
with the consequent waste of computing time. The point is that the efﬁciency case is
not so clear-cut. The implementation of a call-by-need strategy is, in general, more
expensive than a simple call-by-value strategy. The by-value strategy has efﬁcient
implementations on conventional architectures, even if, sometimes, it performs un-
necessary work (every time that an argument that is not required in the body of
the function is evaluated, as happens with the second argument of the function K
in Fig. 11.2). This last case, however, can be treated in an efﬁcient manner with
abstract evaluation techniques that attempt to identify useless arguments. Moreover,
in functional languages including also imperative constructs, a by-value reduction
strategy blends better with those imperative features.

Among the functional languages that we have cited at the beginning of this chap-
ter, Lisp, Scheme, ML, Erlang use a by-value strategy (also because they include
major imperative aspects), while Miranda and Haskell (which are pure functional
languages) use lazy evaluation.

5 The theorem is no longer valid if the hypothesis that the value is primitive is removed. Having
assumed that evaluation is not performed under abstraction, in fact, the two strategies can yield
(functional) values that are distinct. By way of an example, deﬁne I = fn x => x and P =
fn x => (fn y => y x). The term P (I I) reduces to fn y => y (I I) under the
by-name strategy, while, using the by-value strategy, it reduces to fn y => y I. This difference
is not too important in programming languages (where we mainly want to compute values of
primitive type). In Sect. 11.6, we will deﬁne an abstract calculus in which reduction also occurs
in the presence of abstractions. This calculus satisﬁes the conﬂuence property (stronger and more
general than Theorem 11.1), which we will discuss on Sect. 11.6.

11.3 Programming in a Functional Language

347

11.3 Programming in a Functional Language

The mechanisms we described in the last section are sufﬁcient to express programs
for every computable function (they constitute, indeed, a Turing-complete language).
This is the core of every functional language, which, however, is too austere to be
used as a real programming language. Every functional language, therefore, embeds
this core in a wider context which provides mechanisms of different kinds, each
aiming to make programming simpler and more expressive.

11.3.1 Local Environment

The mechanism of global deﬁnitions in the environment that we have used this far
has too little structure for a modern language. As in conventional languages, it is
appropriate to provide explicit mechanisms to introduce deﬁnitions with limited
scope, as for example:

let x = exp in exp1 end

This introduces the binding of x to the value of exp in a scope which includes

only exp1.

To tell the truth, the presence of functional expressions already introduces nested
scopes and associated environments which are composed of the formal parameters
of the function bound to the actual parameters. From the point of view of evaluation,
we can indeed consider the construct

let x = exp in exp1 end

as syntactic sugar for

( fn x = > exp1) exp.

The use of local scopes is too important, however, and justiﬁes the introduction

of the special syntax for them.

11.3.2 Interactiveness

Every functional language has an interactive environment. The language is used by
entering expressions which the abstract machine evaluate, returning their values.
Deﬁnitions are particular expressions which modify the global environment (and
may return a value).

This model immediately suggests interpreter-based implementations, even if there
are efﬁcient implementations that generate compiled code the ﬁrst time a deﬁnition
is stored in the environment.

348

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

11.3.3 Pattern Matching

One of the most annoying aspects of recursive functional programming is handling
terminal cases by means of explicit “if” expressions. Let us take, for example, the
(very inefﬁcient) function which returns the nth term of the Fibonacci series:

fun Fibo n = if n =0 then 1

else if n =1 then 1

else Fibo (n -1)+ Fibo (n -2);

The mechanism of pattern matching present in some languages such as ML and
Haskell, allows us to give a deﬁnition (which is equivalent to the above) as follows:

fun Fibo 0 = 1
Fibo 1 = 1
Fibo n = Fibo (n -1)+ Fibo (n -2);

|
|

The “|” character is read “or”. Each branch of the deﬁnition corresponds to a dif-
ferent case of the function. The most interesting part of this deﬁnition is the formal
parameters. They are no longer constrained to be identiﬁers but can be patterns, that
is, expressions formed from variables (the last is an example), constants (in the other
cases) and other constructs that depend on the language’s type system (we will see an
example using lists below). A pattern is a kind of schema, a model against which to
match the actual parameter. When the function is applied to an actual parameter, it is
compared with the patterns (using the order in which they appear in the program) and
the body corresponding to the ﬁrst pattern which matches with the actual parameter
is chosen.

The pattern-matching mechanism is particularly ﬂexible when structured types
are used, for example lists.6 In ML syntax, a list is denoted by square brackets with
the elements separated by commas. For example

[ " one " , " two " , " t h r e e " ]

is a list of three strings. The operator, :: denotes “cons” (that is the operator that
adds an element to the head of a list):

" zero " ::[ " one " , " two " , " three " ]

is an expression whose value is the list:

[ " zero " , " one " , " two " , " three " ].

Finally, nil is the empty list. Thus

" four " :: nil

has value [“four”]. Using pattern matching, we can deﬁne a function which
computes the length of a generic list such as:

6 Recall that in the functional realm, a list is an immutable data, thus what, e.g., in Python would
be called instead a tuple.

11.3 Programming in a Functional Language

349

fun l e n g t h nil = 0

|

l e n g t h e :: r e s t = 1 + l e n g t h ( r e s t );

Note that the names used in the pattern are used as formal parameters to indicate
parts of the actual parameter. It should be clear the advantage in terms of conciseness
and clarity with respect to the usual deﬁnition:

fun l e n g t h l i s t = if list = nil then 0

else 1 + l e n g t h ( tl l i s t );

This deﬁnition, moreover, requires the introduction of a selection function (which
we have written tl) to obtain the list that is obtained by removing the head element.
The selection operation is, on the other hand, implicit in pattern matching.

An important constraint is that a variable cannot appear twice in the same pattern.
For example, consider the following “deﬁnition” of a function which, applied to a
list, returns true if and only if the ﬁrst two elements of the list are equal:

fun Eq nil = f a l s e
Eq [ e ] = f a l s e
Eq x :: x :: rest = true
Eq x :: y :: rest = f a l s e ;

|
|
|

This deﬁnition is syntactically illegal because the third pattern contains the variable
x twice, where it is used to test the equality of the ﬁrst two elements. The pattern-
matching mechanism is one way to check that the form of an actual parameter agrees
with a pattern, not that the values it contains bear certain relationships. Otherwise
stated, pattern matching is not uniﬁcation, a much more general mechanism (and
more complex to implement) and which we will discuss in the context of the logic
programming paradigm (Chap. 12).7

11.3.4 Programming in a Functional Style

Programming in a functional style revolves around immutable data, manipulated by a
(large) set of (small) functions. Using higher-order functions one may deﬁne general
programming schemata as functions, which can then be instantiated to obtain speciﬁc
program behaviors. A typical example is the so-called “map, ﬁlter, fold pattern”
which is the functional equivalent of the “linear scan of a sequence” in imperative
style.

The function map(f,list_of_data) is a (usually predeﬁned) function that
returns the list which is obtained by applying f to any element of list_of_data.
Instead of the imperative Python code

7 The implementation of pattern matching is nothing other than the “obvious” translation into a
sequence of ifs. In the case of Eq, the third pattern would require checking the equality of two
elements of arbitrary type. If we have values for which the language does not deﬁne equality (as
happens, for example, for functional values), it would not be possible to implement an equality test.

350

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

res =[]
for e in l i s t _ o f _ d a t a :

res . a p p e n d ( f ( e ))

we would simply write res=map(f,list_of_data).

takes a binary function f and applies it

The function fold(f,init,list_of_data) is a (usually predeﬁned) func-
tion that
the elements of
list_of_data, returning the accumulated result; init is the initial value used
to start the fold. For example, fold(fn x,y=>x+y, 0, list_of_int) re-
turns the sum of all the elements of list_of_int.8

to all

The function filter(p,list_of_data) is a (usually predeﬁned) function
that returns the list which is obtained by taking those elements of list_of_data
which satisfy the predicate (the condition) p.

Other sets of higher-order functions allow for the concise (and efﬁcient) expression
of many other program schemata. The essential point we want to make is that the
extensive use of program schemata increases the modularity of code. And the more
modular a program is, the more easily we may factor the testing (or the veriﬁcation,
or the proof of correctness) of that program.

It is clear that one may use a functional programming style also using programming
languages that allow for other programming paradigms. Once a language provides
higher-order functions, it becomes easy to write large programs which avoid state-
based computations. This is the case, for instance, of Scala, which has a large “func-
tional subset” and has all the needed, predeﬁned higher-order functions.9 Moreover,
in Scala names can be introduced by two distinct constructs: var declares a name that
can be re-assigned, while val binds a name to a value, without allowing any further
modiﬁcation of this binding. By using val and only unmodiﬁable values we avoid
any side-effect, and hence we obtain a truly functional programming style. What
is peculiar to pure programming languages is that the absence of any side-effect10
allows much easier control of the correctness of a program, see Sect. 11.4.

11.3.5 Types

As in conventional languages, the type system is an aspect of primary importance in
functional languages, as well. Every functional language we have cited provides the
usual primitive types (integers, booleans, characters) with operations on their values.
With the exception of Scheme, which is a language with dynamic type checking, all
the others have elaborate static type systems. These type systems allow the deﬁnition
of new types such as pairs, lists, “records” (that is, tuples of labelled values). For

8 See the use of the anonymous function (the lambda) as argument to fold.
9 Also Python’s functions are ﬁrst-class citizens. Differently from Scala, however, Python has no
linguistic construct to limit the re-assignability of names. The isolation of a pure functional subset
is therefore more problematic.
10 Or even the limited, conﬁned side-effects of those languages, like Erlang and Scala, which are
not pure but insist on encapsulating any side-effect into speciﬁc functions.

11.3 Programming in a Functional Language

351

example, in ML, we can deﬁne a function add_p which takes as arguments a pair
of integers and returns their sum:

fun a d d _ p ( n1 , n2 ) = n1 + n2 ;

Note the fundamental difference between add_p and add which we deﬁned on
Sect. 11.1.1: add_p requires a pair of integers and it would make no sense to
provide just one value for n1 and none for n2. Instead, add is a function which
inputs one number and returns a function that takes another number and returns the
sum of both.11

An important part of the type system in functional languages is the one dedicated to
the types of functions, given that functions are denotable and expressible values (and
often also storable, if the language includes imperative aspects). In typed functional
languages, this also means that some functional expressions are illegal because they
cannot be typed. For example, the following higher-order function is illegal in most
typed languages:

fun F f n = if n =0 then f (1) else f ( " p i p p o " );

The reason for this is that the formal parameter, f, must simultaneously have types
int -> ’a and string -> ’a (where ’a denotes a type variable, that is, a
generic type that is not yet instantiated).

Another illegal expression (because it violates typing) is self-application:

fun D e l t a x = x x ;

The expression, (x x), is illegal because there is no way to assign a unique and
consistent type to x. Given that it occurs on the left as an application, it must have
a type of the form ’a -> ’b. Since, then, it also appears as the argument to a
function (on the right of the application), it must have the type that the function
requires: therefore, x must be of the type ’a. Putting the two constraints together,
we have it that x must, at the same time, be of type ’a and of type ’a -> ’b and
there is no way to “unify” these two expressions.

In languages without a strong typing system, such as Scheme, the function Delta
is, instead, legal. In Scheme, we can also apply Delta to itself. The expression
(obviously written in Scheme syntax)

( D e l t a D e l t a )

constitutes a simple example of a divergent program. The lack of a static type check
makes it possible in Scheme to write expressions such as:

(4 3)

Here, the aim is to apply the integer 4 to the integer 3. Since the left-hand part of this
application is not a function, the abstract machine will generate an error at execution
time.

11 The passage from a function requiring, as argument, a pair (or, more generally, a tuple) to a unary
higher-order function, is called the curryﬁcation of a function. The operation is named after Haskell
Curry, one of the founding fathers of the theory of the λ-calculus.

352

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

In the case of ML, the most interesting aspect of its type system is its support for

polymorphism (see Sect. 8.8 and, in particular, the box on Sect. 8.7.4).

11.3.6 Inﬁnite Objects

In the presence of by-name or lazy strategies, it is possible to deﬁne and manipulate
streams, that is, data structures that are (potentially) inﬁnite. In this section, we will
give a small example of how this can be done. We cannot give the example in ML
because it uses a by-value strategy. The example is possible, though, in Haskell.
So, to avoid loading the reader with a different syntax, we will write the terms with
the same concrete syntax as ML but with the stipulation that evaluation must be
understood as lazy.

First, we have to clarify the concept of value for data structures such as lists.
In a language that uses eager evaluation, a value of type T list is a list whose
elements are values of type T. In a lazy language, this is not a good notion of value
because it might require the evaluation of useless redexes, contrary to the call-by-
need philosophy. To see the reason, deﬁne the functions:

fun hd x :: rest = x ;
fun tl x :: rest = rest ;

The functions return, respectively, the ﬁrst element (that is, the head) and the rest
(that is, the tail) of a non-empty list (in the case of the empty list, the abstract machine
will generate an error when doing pattern matching).

Let us now consider the expression

hd [2 , (( fn n = > n +1) 2)].

To calculate its value (that is, 2), it is not necessary to reduce the redex that comprises
the second element of the list because it will never be used in the body of the hd
function. For these reasons, in a by-need context, a value of type list is any expression
of the form:

exp1 :: exp2

where exp1 and exp2 can also contain redexes.

It is then possible to deﬁne a list by recursion, as for example:

val i n f i n i t y 2 = 2 :: i n f i n i t y 2 ;

The expression infinity2 corresponds to a potentially inﬁnite list whose ele-
ments are all 2 (using eager evaluation, such an expression would cause a divergent
computation). We may manipulate infinity2 under lazy evaluation. For example,

hd i n f i n i t y 2

is an expression whose evaluation terminates with the value 2. Another expression
with value 2 is

hd ( tl ( tl ( tl i n f i n i t y 2 ))).

11.3 Programming in a Functional Language

353

Side Effects in Lisp

Lisp, the ﬁrst functional language, is based on a data structure called a dotted pair (or cons cell, see
the box on Sect. 6.1.1). Dotted pairs are composed of two parts: the car (for contents of the address
register) and cdr (for contents of the decrement register). An expression of the form:

( cons a b )

allocates a dotted pair and initialises it so that its car points to the value of a and its cdr points to
the value of b. The two components of a dotted pair can be selected using the functions car and
cdr. So,

( cdr ( cons a b ))

has the value b. These are characteristics that belong to the pure part of Lisp.

Lisp has, in addition, imperative mechanisms. For example, there are functions such as
(rplaca x a) and (rplacd x a) which, respectively, assign to the car and assign to the
cdr of the dotted pair x the value of a:

( cdr ( r p l a c d ( cons ’ a ’ b ) ’ c ))

This has the value ’c. Other side-effecting functions are set and setq.

As a last example of a stream, the following function constructs an inﬁnite list of

natural numbers starting with its argument, n:

fun n u m b e r s F r o m n = n :: n u m b e r s F r o m ( n +1);

We can deﬁne a higher-order function that applies its functional argument to all

the elements of a list, as in:

fun map f nil = nil

|

map f e :: rest = f ( e ):: rest ;

We can now produce the inﬁnite list of all the squares starting from n*n:

fun s q u a r e s F r o m n = map ( fn y = > y * y ) ( n u m b e r s F r o m n );

11.3.7 Imperative Aspects

Many functional languages also include imperative mechanisms which introduce a
notion of state that can be modiﬁed by side effects.

In ML, there are real modiﬁable variables (called “reference cells”) with their own
types. For every type T in the language (including functional types, therefore), the
type T ref is deﬁned and its values are modiﬁable variables that can contain values
of type T. A modiﬁable variable of type T, initialised to the value v (of type T) is
created by:

ref v

The usual constructs that associate names and values can also be used on values

of type T ref. For example:

354

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

val I = ref 4;

This creates a reference cell of type int ref, which is initialised to 4 and has
the name I. This is what, in imperative languages, we call “the modiﬁable variable
(with name) I.” Obviously, I is the name of the reference cell and not of the value
it contains (it is an l-value). To obtain its r-value, it is necessary to dereference it
explicitly using the ! operator:

val n = ! I + 1;

The expression !I is of type int. In general, if V is an expression of type T
ref, !V is of type T. The line above associates the name n with the value 5. At risk
of being pedantic, let us observe that n is not a modiﬁable variable, it is an ordinary
name bound to a value in the environment.

Reference cells can be modiﬁed using assignments:

I := ! I + 1;

Note the difference with the deﬁnition of the value n given above. Here, we are
modifying (using a side effect) the r-value of a reference cell that already exists. The
type of an imperative construct of this kind is unit (recall Sect. 8.3.7).

The presence of modiﬁable variables clearly introduces the possibility of aliasing.

Let us indeed consider the following deﬁnitions:

val I = ref 4;
val J = I ;

The second line associates the value of the name I (that is, the reference cell—the
l-value) with the name J. We here have a classic situation of aliasing: I and J are
different names for the same l-value. After execution of the fragment

I := 5;
val z = ! J ;

the name z is associated with the value 5.

The language deﬁnition does not specify how to implement an assignment between
modiﬁable variables. From the examples given so far using integers, one could imag-
ine a traditional implementation with the r-value being copied from the source to the
destination of the assignment. However, values with quite different memory sizes
can be stored in reference cells. Let us consider, for example, modiﬁable variables
that contain lists and strings:

val S = ref " pear " ;
val L = ref [ " one " , " two " , " t h r e e " ];

The name S is of type string ref, while L is of type (string list) ref.
The two modiﬁable variables associated with the names S and L can contain, respec-
tively, any string and any list. For example, we can perform two assignments:

S := " t h i s   is   a   s t r i n g   m u c h   l o n g e r   than   p r e v i o u s l y " ;
L := " zero " :: " four " :: " five " :: ! L ;

11.4 An Assessment

355

The new values of L and S require more memory than their previous values did.
It is not possible to implement these assignments using a simple (and traditional)
value copy. The abstract machine will, in this case, copy references (or pointers)
to these values. All of this is, though, completely invisible to the language user.
The implementation handles the two space requirements by allocating the necessary
memory for each case and then modiﬁes the references.

As well as modiﬁable variables, ML also provides imperative control constructs,

such as sequential composition (;) and loops.

It is appropriate to note that, in the presence of these imperative features, both
Theorem 11.1 and the property that we cited immediately after it do not apply. This
is particularly relevant in the case of a lazy evaluation strategy which would become
incorrect in the presence of side effects. It is for this reason that languages such as
Miranda and Haskell, which use lazy evaluation, do not admit side effects of any
kind (they are purely functional languages).

11.4 An Assessment

The computing beginner often holds that design and writing efﬁcient programs are
the most important tasks on which their occupation is based. Software Engineering,
however, has largely shown, both in theory, as in ample experimental studies, that the
most critical factors in a software project are its correctness, readability, maintain-
ability and its dependability. In economic terms, these factors account for more than
ﬁfty percent of the total cost; in social terms, software maintenance (which depends
in a critical way on its readability) can involve hundreds of different people over a
period of tens of years. In ethical terms, the life, or health, of thousands of people
can depend on the reliability and correctness of a software system.

The goal of the research in program correctness (which uses tools and techniques
from many different areas of computer science) is to produce software with correct-
ness guarantees comparable to those with which structural engineers release their
own products (bridges, columns, structures). They have at their disposal a whole
corpus of applied mathematics with which to “calculate” the structures. If a bridge
must take a certain load, be subjected to certain winds, can be exposed to seismic
events of a given magnitude, etc., it must have given dimensions, must be built using
materials with certain characteristics, etc. These characteristics are not determined
by the designer’s taste but are calculated using appropriate techniques.

Reasoning about programs with side effects is particularly difﬁcult and expensive.
On the contrary, there are standard techniques that allow reasoning about side-effect-
free programs. If reliability, readability, and correctness are more important than
efﬁciency, there is no doubt that functional programming generates more readable
software, whose correctness is easier to establish and, therefore, is more reliable.
Indeed, a function may seen as a behaviour, and several simple behaviours can be
combined to obtain more complex ones.

This is true also for non-pure functional programming languages—and for con-
ventional imperative languages with a signiﬁcant functional programming subset—
where we may isolate signiﬁcant software components which are indeed stateless,

356

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

and thus one may reason on those components in isolation, with the guarantee that
they will always behave in the same manner, since no side-effect is around.12 It is for
these reasons that higher-order functions as ﬁrst-class citizens are one of the major
components of any modern programming language, of any paradigm. Mechanisms
for concurrent programming (for instance, futures or callbacks) are most of the times
based on functions. Designing and implementing a concurrent system in terms of
value transformations (“term rewriting”) instead of state transformations, makes it
easier to deal with the inherent non-determinism of these systems.

Let us stress, ﬁnally, that functional languages had a tremendous impact on the
design of programming languages of any paradigm. Many concepts and experimental
features in functional programming have later migrated to other paradigms. Among
these concepts, type systems, generics, polymorphism, type safety, all originated in
functional languages (because is it simpler to study and to implement them in an
environment without side effects).

11.5 Implementation: The SECD Machine

The technology for implementing functional programming languages is today so-
phisticated and cannot be adequately described in this book. The techniques for
passing functions as parameters we described in Chap. 7 constitute the heart of
these implementations. In order to give more details on how to handle higher-order
functions, we will limit ourselves to summarising the SECD machine, a prototype
proposed in 1964 by Peter Landin for evaluation by value. Many other abstract ma-
chines have developed out of the SECD machine.

We will describe the SECD machine in an abstract manner, using a very simple,
purely functional language that uses only abstraction and application. The primitive
elements of the language are the names of constants and variables and some primitive
functions (for example, we could have constants 0, 1, true, etc. and primitive
functions succ and pred). The important part of the machine is not concerned
with these aspects of the language but with the presence of higher-order functions.
Let us assume, for simplicity, that we are only dealing with unary functions. Let us
assume that Var is a non-terminal from which can be derived a denumerable number
of names (of variables) and that Const and Fun are, respectively, the non-terminals
from which are derived the appropriate constants and primitive functions. We can
state the grammar of our example language as:

12 One major example is the Erlang programming language, designed at Ericsson for building scal-
able, concurrent systems with high availability guarantees; or, in more concrete terms, “to provide
a better way of programming telephony applications” [1]. An Erlang application is a collection
of many, small processes that communicate through messages. Any such lightweight process is
purely functional (although the system resulting from their composition is not). In 1998 Ericsson
announced the AXD301 switch, with more than one million of lines of Erlang code, probably the
largest ever program in a functional language, at that time. The AXD301 was extremely reliable,
and this was related to the quality of the functional design.

11.5 Implementation: The SECD Machine

357

exp:: = Const | Var | Fun | (exp exp) | (fn Var => exp).

The SECD machine has four main components:

• A Stack to store the partial results which will be used during the computation.
• An Environment, that is, a list of associations between names and values. Among
values, there are abstractions (since “there is no evaluation under an abstraction”).
To deal with abstractions with free variables we need to couple the abstraction
to the environment in which the free variables in its body are to be evaluated (a
concept we called a closure in Chap. 7). Let us assume that a closure is a triple
composed of an environment, an expression (which will always be the body of
an abstraction) and a variable (representing the variable that was bound in the
abstraction). We will therefore write a closure as cl(E, exp, x), which represents
the abstraction (fn x => exp) in the environment E.

• A Control, represented by a stack of expressions to be evaluated. Among the
expressions, we have the special operator @, which is read “app” and which
indicates that an application should be executed (because the two expressions that
comprise an application have already been evaluated and are stored in the next two
positions on the stack).

• A storage area called the Dump, that is a stack in which previous states of the
machine have been saved when the computation was suspended to evaluate internal
redexes.

We write [a1, . . . , an] to denote the stack composed of the elements a1, . . . , an
with a1 at its top. [] is the empty stack. If P is a stack, top(P) denotes the topmost
element, while tl(P) denotes P with the top element removed.

A state of the machine is composed of a quadruple, (S, E, C, D). A dump is

always composed of a structure of the form:

(S1, E1, C1, (S2, E2, C2, (S3, E3, C3, []))).

This state of the dump has been obtained by ﬁrst saving the state

then the state

(S3, E3, C3, [])

(S2, E2, C2, (S3, E3, C3, []))

which includes the previous dump, and so on.

To evaluate an expression, exp, the machine starts its operation in the state
([], [], [exp], []) and terminates when both the control, C, and the dump, D, are
empty.

The operation of the SECD is described by a transition function which allows it
to pass from one state to a succeeding one using the following rules. The machine
selects the rule according to the expression on the control list (imagine that control
is described using abstract syntax). Let us assume, therefore, that the machine ﬁnds
itself in the generic state, (S, E, C, D), then:

358

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

1. A constant, c (e.g., 1, 0, true), is on top of the control list, that is, there is an
expression that does not need to be further evaluated. In this case, the new state
of the machine is (c :: S, E, tl(C), D) in which the (immediate) value of the ex-
pression is pushed onto the stack and the expression just evaluated is removed
from the control list.

2. There is a variable, x, on the top of the control list. In this case, the value is the one
which the environment associates with x. Therefore, the new state of the machine
is (E(x) :: S, E, tl(C), D).

3. On the top of the control list, there is an application of the form (exp f expa

).
In this case, since the SECD implements eager evaluation, it is necessary to
follow the evaluation procedure we described in Sect. 11.2.3. The new state is
:: @ :: tl(C), D) which expresses the fact that the next
therefore (S, E, exp f
expression to be evaluated is the functional part of the application (which at some
point will have as its value a closure, as we will see), followed by the argument
part of the application, followed, ﬁnally, be the special expression, @, which will
force the actual application of the function to its argument.

:: expa

4. On the top of the control list, there is an abstraction, (fn x => exp). We
know that we are already in the presence of a value which must however be
“closed” with the current environment. The new state of the machine is therefore
(cl(E, exp, x) :: S, E, tl(C), D).

5. The special value @ is on the top of the control list. We then know, by construction,
that on the stack there are two values that represent, respectively, an argument
(on the top of the stack) and a function to apply (the second element). There are
two subcases which depend on the function to be applied:

• The function is a primitive function,

f , such as succ. The function must
be directly applied to its argument and the new state of the machine is
( f (top(S)) :: tl(tl(S)), E, tl(C), D).

• The function on the top is a closure of the form cl(E1, exp, x). This is one of the
central points of the SECD machine; it brings the dump into play. It is necessary
to use the copy rule. The computation passes to exp in the environment of the
closure, E1, (and not in the current environment, E) modiﬁed by the binding
of the formal parameter. But the computation performed up to now must not be
forgotten. It is frozen on the dump. The new state of the machine is therefore
([], E1[x ← top(S)], [exp], (tl(tl(S)), E, tl(C), D)).

6. The control list is empty. This can happen when the computation has terminated
(in which case, the dump is also empty). It can also happen when a computation
started by the previous rule (the one for applying a closure to a value) is ﬁnished.
In this second case (that is, non-empty dump of the form (S1, E1, C1, D1)), it is
necessary to resume the computation saved on the dump, restoring, at the same
time, the value just computed (which is on the top of the stack). The new state of
the machine is (top(S) :: S1, E1, C1, D1).

11.6 Fundamentals: The λ-Calculus

359

Fig. 11.3 A computation using the SECD machine

Figure 11.3 shows how the SECD machine computes the value of the expression

(F 3), where:

F = fn x => (sqrt ((fn y => (succ x)) x)).

The computation is shown as a table in which every row represents a transition
of the machine. The rule being used for the transition is indicated in the rightmost
column.

11.6 Fundamentals: The λ-Calculus

At the start of the chapter, we saw that the functional paradigm is inspired by a
foundation for computability theory, different from that based on Turing machines
(but equivalent to that as far as expressive power is concerned). We present in this
section some of the ingredients of this formal system for computability—λ-calculus.
The syntax of the λ-calculus is extremely austere and can be given in one line
using the following grammar, where X is a non-terminal which represents a generic
variable, M is the initial symbol, the dot and the two parentheses are terminal sym-
bols:

M ::= X | (M M) | (λX.M).

360

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

In addition, let us assume that we also have a denumerable set of terminal symbols
for variables which, for ease of notation, we will in general write using the last
lower-case letters of the alphabet: x, y, z, etc.

The reader will recognise in these clauses both application and abstraction (written
using λ instead of fn) which we introduced informally in Sect. 11.1.3. We call λ-
terms (or, simply, terms) the strings of terminals that are derived from this grammar.

Syntactic Conventions, Free and Bound Variables
The “ofﬁcial” books on the λ-calculus introduce many additional conventions to
simplify the notation. For example, application associates to the left, or:

M1 M2 · · · Mn

stand for (· · · (M1 M2) · · · Mn).

The scope of a λ extends as far as possible to the right (that is, λx.x y stands for
(λx.(x y)) and not for ((λx.x).y). We will seek to use these conventions as little as
possible by using parentheses where necessary. We will also speak of subterms, with
the obvious meaning (for example, (x y) is a subterm of (λx.(x y)) but λx is not).

The abstraction operator binds the variable upon which it acts,13 in the double
sense that, semantically, consistent renaming of the bound variable does not modify
the semantics of an expression and, syntactically, possible substitutions have no
effect on bound variables. We formalise these aspects in the following deﬁnitions.
First, we deﬁne, for an arbitrary expression, M, the set of its free variables, which
we denote by Fv(M), and of its bound variables Bv(M):

Fv(x) = {x}
Fv(M N ) = Fv(M) ∪ Fv(N )
Fv(λx.M) = Fv(M) − {x}

Bv(x) = ∅,
Bv(M N ) = Bv(M) ∪ Bv(N ),
Bv(λx.M) = Bv(M) ∪ {x}.

Substitution

We can formally deﬁne the concept of substitution without variable capture which
constitutes the core of the copy rule. We deﬁne, therefore, the notation, M[N /x]
which we read as the substitution of N for the free occurrences of x in M:

x[N /x] = N ,
y[N /x] = y
(M1 M2)[N /x] = (M1[N /x]M2[N /x]),
(λy.M)[N /x] = (λy.M[N /x])
(λy.M)[N /x] = (λy.M)

when x (cid:7)= y,

when x (cid:7)= y e y /∈ Fv(N ),
when x = y.

The deﬁnition is simple. Practically, to substitute N in place of x in M, we “push”
the substitution down towards the leaves of the syntax tree, that is to the variables,
and check if the leaf is labelled with x or with some other variable. But the deﬁnition
is subtle, since it avoids capture of the variables in N by some λ. This is the reason

13 Remember what was said in Sect. 7.1 about formal parameters to procedures.

11.6 Fundamentals: The λ-Calculus

361

why the last clause requires that y /∈ Fv(N ). What happens if, on the other hand, y
is present in N ? We can rename the variable bound by λ. As we said above, indeed,
it is not the name of the variable that counts when a λ is applied, but only the way in
which it is used. In other words, we will consider as equivalent two terms that differ
only by the names of their bound variables. For example, λx.x and λy.y, or λx.λy.x
and λv.λw.v.

Alpha Equivalence

The intuitive idea that two expressions are equivalent when they differ only in the
names of their free variables is formalised in the concept of α-equivalence:

λx.M ≡α λy.M[y/x] y fresh

where by “y fresh”, we mean that y is a new variable not present in M.

Two terms that differ by just the replacement of some subterm of one term by an

α-equivalent subterm will be considered identical.

Computation: β Reduction
Computation proceeds by rewriting according to the prescriptions of β-reduction:
(λx.M)N →β M[N /x].
More generally, we will say that M β-reduces to N (and we write M → N ) when
N is the result of the application of one step of β-reduction to some subterm of M.
A subterm of the form (λx.M)N is a redex whose reductum is M[N /x]. Note that
the concept of β-reduction is not deterministic. Whenever there exists more than
one redex in the same term, it is not prescribed which one will be chosen. Observe
that the notion of reduction that we just deﬁned does not restrict the position of the
reduced redex. It may well be the case that the redex is contained in the body of an
abstraction. Contrary to the reduction we deﬁned in Sect. 11.2.1, here we do allow
reduction under abstraction.

β-reduction is a relation that is not symmetric. In general, if M → N , it is not
the case that N → M. It is useful to introduce a symmetric relation which we call
β-equivalence, deﬁned as the reﬂexive and transitive closure of β-reduction and
denoted by =β . Intuitively, M =β N means that M and N are connected through a
sequence of β-reductions (not necessarily all in the same direction).

Normal Forms
When a λ-term that does not contain a redex, β-reduction terminates; such terms
are called normal forms. For example, λx.λy.x is a normal form, while the term
λx.(λy.y)x) is not a normal form because it contains the redex (λy.y)x. We have,
then:

λx.(λy.y)x → λx.x

and λx.x is now a normal form.

362

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

Fig. 11.4 The conﬂuence
property for λ-terms

Some terms have reductions that terminate (in a normal form). There are however
also terms which reduce an inﬁnite number of times without ever producing a normal
form, as for example:

(λx.x x)(λx.x x) → (x x)[(λx.x x)/x]
= (λx.x x)(λx.x x)
→ (λx.x x)(λx.x x)
→ . . . .

Conﬂuence
A fundamental property of the λ-calculus is that its inherent non-determinism has
no dangerous effects. In any way we might choose the redex to reduce inside a term,
the ﬁnal result (the normal form) of a sequence of reductions is always the same.
Stated in a more formal manner, we have the following property, called conﬂuence
and graphically represented in Fig. 11.4.

If M reduces to N1 in a number of reduction steps, and M also reduces to N2 in a number of
reduction steps, then there exists a term, P, such that both N1 and N2 both reduce to P in a
number of steps.

An important consequence of this property is that if a term can be reduced to a
normal form, this normal form is unique and independent of the path followed to
reach it. As we already observed on Sect. 11.2.4, crucial for this property to hold in
full generality (and not only in the restricted sense of Theorem 11.1) is the possibility
of reducing under an abstraction.

Fixed Point Operators
We have seen how the λ-calculus formalises many concepts that we have seen in this
chapter.14 We have not however introduced any mechanisms for the deﬁnition of

14 We should rather say: formalises many of the concepts that we have seen in this book. The
λ-calculus was a fundamental inspiration to the design of programming languages starting with

11.6 Fundamentals: The λ-Calculus

363

recursive functions. The λ-calculus has no notion of an external or global environment
in which to assign names to terms, as it happens when deﬁning a recursive function,
for which naming seems to be a fundamental concept.

The point (surprising at ﬁrst sight) is that the concepts of abstraction and local
environment (which is derived from the possibility of nested λ’s) are on their own
sufﬁcient for the deﬁnition of recursion or, more precisely, ﬁxed points.

Let us consider the following very simple recursive deﬁnition, which, for simplic-
ity, we write in a λ-calculus extended with integers and conditional expressions15 :

Z = λn. if n = 0 then 0 else 1 + Z (n − 1).

(11.1)

Our experience with programming languages suggests, perhaps, that we should

read this relation as a deﬁnition:

Z

def= λn. if n = 0 then 0 else 1 + Z (n − 1).
But this is not the only reading possible (in particular, it is not possible in the λ-
calculus, which has no concept of global environment to allow us to use the name of
a term inside an expression). A mathematician would probably read it as an equation
with unknown Z (recall the discussion on inductive deﬁnitions in Sect. 6.5). For this
very simple equation, it is clear that one solution (rather, in this case, the unique
solution) is the identity function:

I (n) = n.

(11.2)

What we are looking for is a general method which allows us to pass from an
equation such as (11.1) to an algorithm, that is to a λ-term, which is a solution to
this equation when the equality symbol is interpreted as β-equivalence:

Z =β λn. if n = 0 then 0 else 1 + Z (n − 1).

(11.3)

Note that this is to ask more than simply provide an arbitrary function such as (11.2).
It requires a term which in the calculus satisﬁes (11.3).16

Let us consider, ﬁrst, the function that is obtained from (11.3) by λ-abstracting

on the unknown function:

def= λ f.λn. if n = 0 then 0 else 1 + f (n − 1).

F

Hence our problem is to ﬁnd a suitable term g such that:

g =β F(g).

Algol and Lisp. Concepts such as scope, local environment, call by name, to mention only the
most important, have been “imported” into programming languages on the basis of analogous
concepts in the λ-calculus.
15 We use this extension only to simplify the presentation. In the λ-calculus, it is possible to codify
numbers and conditions using only variables, abstractions and applications.
16 The term λn.n is an algorithm for the only function which satisﬁes (11.1), but it is not a solution
of (11.3), which expresses a determinate behaviour through reduction.

364

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

A term, g, which satisﬁes an equation of this type is called a ﬁxed point of F.
Therefore our problem of ﬁnding a solution to (11.3) can be reformulated as a problem
of ﬁnding the ﬁxed point of some function.

We want now to show that the λ-calculus provides a general method to “automat-
ically” solve these equations. Let us, indeed, consider the following term, which for
convenience (and following tradition), we name Y :

Y

def= λ f.(λx. f (x x))(λx. f (x x)).
This is a term which can be reduced an inﬁnite number of times without reaching
normal form. But it can be put to good use. Let us indeed try to apply it to an arbitrary
term, M:

Y M =β (λx.M(x x))(λx.M(x x))

=β M((λx.M(x x))(λx.M(x x)))
=β M(Y M).

In the last step, we have used the fact that was established in the ﬁrst line, that

Y M =β (λx.M(x x))(λx.M(x x))

and we have then substituted equals for equals. Y M is therefore a ﬁxed point of M:
Y is a term in the calculus which can compute the ﬁxed point of an arbitrary term.17
We say that Y is a ﬁxed point operator. It is then quite clear that Y provides solutions
to any recursive equation. In particular, it gives us a solution to (11.3):

Id

def= Y F.
The term Id thus deﬁned has a reduction behaviour which satisﬁes the relation with
which we started. It is instructive to try to apply this function to a speciﬁc argument
to see how the mechanism of ﬁxed points is really capable of computing a recursive
function. For example:

Id 2

def= (Y F) 2
→F(Y F) 2
→if 2 = 0 then 0 else 1 + ((Y F)(2 − 1))
→1 + ((Y F) 1)
→1 + (F (Y F) 1)
→1 + ((if 1 = 0 then 0 else 1 + ((Y F)(1 − 1))))
→1 + (1 + ((Y F) 0))
→1 + (1 + (if 0 = 0 then 0 else 1 + ((Y F) (0 − 1))))
→1 + (1 + 0)
→2.

17 This shows also that, in the λ-calculus, every term has always at least one ﬁxed point, that
computed by Y .

11.7 Summary

365

At each “recursive call”, Y F provides a new copy of the body of the function which
is used on the next call.

What we have just seen is also true for the deﬁnition of recursive values which

are not functions. The stream that we deﬁned in Sect. 11.3.6 as:

val infinity2 = 2 :: infinity2;

is nothing more than a ﬁxed point:

infinity2

def= Y (λl. 2 :: l).

Observe that Y is a ﬁxed point operator with respect to β-equality.18 If, instead
of β-reduction, we use a different strategy, for example, the analogue of reduction
by value which we deﬁned for functional languages, Y is no longer able to compute
ﬁxed points. For reduction by value, another operator must be used, for example:

H

def= λg.((λ f. f f )(λ f.(g(λx. f f x)))).
For reasons of efﬁciency, implementations of functional programming languages do
not use ﬁxed point operators to implement recursion. However, ﬁxed point operators
play a role that is very important to the theory of these languages.

Expressiveness of the λ-Calculus

This very simple formal system, constructed only from the concepts of application
and abstraction, is not as rudimentary as it seems, if it can express arbitrary recursions.
Indeed, it is possible to show that the λ-calculus is a Turing-complete formalism. In
the ﬁrst place, it is possible to encode the natural numbers as λ-terms (a λ-term, n is
associated with the number n) and, then, show that to every computable function, f ,
there corresponds a λ-term M f which computes f : if f (n) = m, then M f n → m.

11.7 Summary

In this chapter, we have presented the functional programming paradigm. In its pure
form, this is a computational model which does not contain the concept of modiﬁable
variable. Computation proceeds by the rewriting of terms that denote functions. The
main concepts that we have discussed are:

• Abstraction. A mechanism for passing from one expression denoting a value to

one denoting a function.

• Application A mechanism dual to abstraction, by which a function is applied to

an argument.

18 Clearly it is not unique. For another operator slightly more complex than Y but which satisﬁes a
stronger relation, see Exercise 7.

366

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

• Computation by rewriting or reduction, in which an expression is repeatedly sim-

pliﬁed until a form that can not be further reduced is encountered.

• Redex. The syntactic structure which is simpliﬁed during reduction and is formed

from the application of an abstraction to an expression.
• The centrality of higher order in this mode of computation.
• The concept of value which corresponds to those syntactic forms not otherwise

reducible and where reduction therefore terminates.

• The different evaluation strategies: by value (or eager), by name, lazy.
• Some mechanisms that the most common functional languages add to the funda-
mental nucleus. Among these, recall: an interactive environment, a rich system of
types, pattern matching, imperative aspects such as variables and assignments.
• A comparison of the functional and imperative paradigms, centred on the notion

of program correctness.

• The SECD machine, a prototype abstract machine for higher-order functional lan-

guages using the by-value strategy.

• The λ-calculus, a simple and powerful formal system that constitutes the formal

nucleus of all functional languages.

11.8 Bibliographical Note

Reading the original article by John McCarthy on Lisp is still a valuable experi-
ence [2]. An elementary introduction to programming using ML is to be found in [3],
while [4] is a more advanced text (which uses the Caml dialect); [5] is the ofﬁcial
deﬁnition of the language and it is useful to read it together with the commentary [6].
The implementation of functional languages, with particular regard to lazy evalu-
ation is dealt with in [7]. The SECD machine was introduced in the pioneering work
of Peter Landin [8].

John Backus’ lecture for the Turing Award [9] should be essential reading (at least

for its ﬁrst part) for every student of programming languages.

The lambda calculus was introduced in the 1930s by Alonzo Church. An original
reference is [10]. The modern reference text is [11], even if [12] is a more accessible
introduction.

11.9 Exercises

1. Consider the following deﬁnitions in ML:

fun K x y = x ;
fun I x = x ;
fun O m e g a x = O m e g a x ;

State what the result of evaluating the following expression will be.

References

367

K ( I 3) ( O m e g a 1).

What would be the result if ML adopted a lazy strategy?

2. Write a function map which applies its ﬁrst parameter (which will be a function)

to all the elements of a list passed as its second argument.

3. Describe formally the operation of the SECD machine, by giving a deﬁnition

using the structural operational semantics that we introduced in Sect. 2.5.

4. In λ-calculus, we deﬁne the code of a natural number, n, as:

def= λ f.λx. f n x

def= λ f.λx. f ( f · · · ( f x) · · · ),

n

where, in the body, there are n occurrences of f . Give the deﬁnition of a term,
prod such that:

prod n m → n ∗ m.

5. Apply the technique of calculating ﬁxed points to solve the following equation

for the unknown fact:

fact =β λn. if n = 0 then 1 else n ∗ fact(n − 1)

and describe the reduction which computes the value of its solution applied to
argument 2.

6. Apply the technique of calculating ﬁxed points to solve the following equation

for the unknown h:

h =β λx. if x > 100 then x − 10 else h(h(x + 11)).

Call the solution Ninetyone, then calculate Ninetyone(99).

7. Consider the λ-terms:

A = λx.λy.y(x x y),
(cid:5) = A A.

Show that (cid:5) is a ﬁxed-point operator for which the relation:

(cid:5)M → · · · → M ((cid:5)M).
is true. This relation is stronger than that satisﬁed by Y , for which only Y M =β
M(Y M) is true. The term, (cid:5), is called the Turing ﬁxed point operator.

References

1. J. Armstrong, A history of Erlang, in Proceedings of the Third ACM SIGPLAN Conference on
History of Programming Languages, HOPL III (Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, 2007), pp. 6.1–6.26

2. J. McCarthy, Recursive functions of symbolic expressions and their computation by machine,

part I. Commun. ACM 3(4), 184–195 (1960)

3. J.D. Ullman, Elements of ML Programming (Prentice-Hall Inc, Upper Saddle River, 1994)
4. G. Cousineau, M. Mauny, The Functional Approach to Programming (Cambridge University

Press, 1998)

368

11 Functional Programming Paradigm

5. R. Milner, M. Tofte, R. Harper, D. MacQueen, The Deﬁnition of Standard ML - Revised (MIT

Press, 1997)

6. R. Milner, M. Tofte, Commentary on Standard ML (MIT Press, 1991)
7. S. Peyton-Jones, The Implementation of Functional Programming Languages (Prentice Hall,

1987)

8. P.J. Landin, The mechanical evaluation of expressions. Comput. J. 6(4), 308–320 (1964)
9. J. Backus, Can programming be liberated from the von Neumann style? A functional style and

its algebra of programs. Commun. ACM 21(8), 613–641 (1978). Turing Award Lecture

10. A. Church, The Calculi of Lambda Conversion (Princeton University Press, 1941)
11. H. Barendregt, The Lambda Calculus: Its Syntax and Semantics (Elsevier, 1984)
12. R. Hindley, P. Seldin, Introduction to Combinators and Lambda-Calculus (Cambridge Univer-

sity Press, 1986)

Logic Programming Paradigm

12

12.1 Deduction as Computation

A famous slogan by R. Kowalski, accurately captures the concepts underpinning the
activity of programming: Algorithm = Logic + Control. According to this “equa-
tion”, the speciﬁcation of an algorithm, and therefore its formulation in programming
languages, can be separated into two parts. On the one side, the logic of the solution
is speciﬁed—that is, the “what” must be done is deﬁned. On the other, those aspects
related to control are speciﬁed, and therefore the “how” of ﬁnding the desired solution
is clariﬁed. The programmer who uses a traditional imperative language must take
account of both these components. Logic programming, on the other hand, was orig-
inally deﬁned with the idea of separating these two aspects. The programmer is only
required, at least in principle, to provide a logical speciﬁcation. Everything related
to control is delegated to the abstract machine. Using a computational mechanism
based on a particular deduction rule (resolution), the interpreter searches through the
space of possible solutions for the one speciﬁed by the “logic”, deﬁning in this way
the sequence of operations necessary to reach the ﬁnal result.

The basis for this view of computation as logical deduction can be traced back to
the work of K. Gödel and J. Herbrand in the 1930s. In particular, Herbrand antici-
pated, albeit incompletely, some ideas about the process of uniﬁcation, which, as we
shall see, is the basic computational mechanism of logic programming languages.

It was not until the 1960s that a formal deﬁnition (due to A. Robinson) of this
process appeared. Then, ten years later (in the early 1970s) it was realised that formal
automatic deduction of a particular kind could be interpreted as a computational
mechanism. The ﬁrst programming languages of this paradigm were created, among
which Prolog (the name is an acronym for PROgramming in LOGic; for more
information on history, see Sect. 16.4).

Today there are many implemented versions of Prolog, and there are several
other languages in this paradigm (as far as applications are concerned, those including
constraints are of particular interest). All these languages (including Prolog) also

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
M. Gabbrielli and S. Martini, Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms,
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34144-1_12

369

370

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

provide constructs for the explicit speciﬁcation of control, for the sake of efﬁciency.
Since these constructs do not have a direct logical interpretation, they make the
semantics of the language more complicated and cause the loss of part of the purely
declarative nature of the logic paradigm. This notwithstanding, we still call them
logic programming languages—they require the programmer to do little more than
formulate (or declare) the speciﬁcation of the problem to be solved. In some cases,
the resulting programs are really surprising in their brevity, simplicity and clarity, as
we will see in the next section.

Terminological Note

We should distinguish between Logic programming, which is the theoretical founda-
tional formalism, from Prolog, a language that has different implementations. The
concepts we introduce below, if not otherwise stated, are valid for both. The impor-
tant differences will be explicitly pointed out. The programming examples which
we include (usually in this font) are all Prolog code that could be run on some
implementation of the language. The theoretical concepts, on the other hand, even
when they are valid also for Prolog, use mathematical concepts and are rendered
in italic. Moreover, we will follow the Prolog convention that we always write
variables beginning with an upper-case letter. As mentioned before, in the logic pro-
gramming paradigm there exist several other languages, different from Prolog. We
call all of them logic programming languages, or logic languages, for short.

12.1.1 An Example

We start with a fairly informal example since we did not yet introduce either the
syntax or the semantics of logic languages.

Let us consider the following problem. We want to arrange three 1s, three 2s, . . . ,
three 9s in a list (which therefore will consist of 27 numbers) such that, for each
i ∈ [1, 9], there are exactly i numbers between two successive occurrences of the
number i. Therefore, 1, 2, 1, 8, 2, 4, 6, 2 could be a part of the ﬁnal solution, while
1, 2, 1, 8, 2, 4, 2, 6 is not (because there is only a single number between the last
two occurrences of 2). The reader is invited to try to write a program that solves this
problem using her preferred imperative programming language. It is not a difﬁcult
exercise but does require some care, because even if the “what” must be done is
clear, the “how” of the desired solution is not trivial. For example, in a naive (and
inefﬁcient) way, we may generate all possible permutations of a list of 27 numbers
containing three 1s, three 2s, three 3s, . . . , three 9s, to see if one of them satisﬁes
the required propriety. Even this solution (probably the conceptually simplest one),
however, requires the speciﬁcation in detail of the aspects of control to generate the
permutations of a list.

Reasoning in a declarative fashion, on the other hand, we can proceed as follows.
First, we need a list which we will call Ls. This list will have to contain 27 elements,

12.1 Deduction as Computation

371

something that we can specify using a unary predicate (that is, a relation symbol)1
list_of_27. If we write list_of_27(Ls), we mean, therefore, that Ls must
be a list of 27 elements. In other words, list_of_27 deﬁnes a unary relation (a
subset of all possible ﬁnite strings) formed by all the lists of 27 elements. For this,
we can deﬁne list_of_27 as follows:

l i s t _ o f _ 2 7 ( Ls ): -

Ls = [_ , _ , _ , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ , _ , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ , _ , _ ].

where the part to the left of the :- symbol denotes what is being deﬁned, while the
part to the right of :- indicates the deﬁnition. The = denotes an equality concept
whose deﬁnition, for the time being, is left to intuition (it has nothing to do with
an assignment, however). Anticipating the Prolog notation for lists, here we write
[X1, X2, ...,Xn] to denote the list that contains the n variables X1, X2, . . . ,
Xn (see Sect. 12.4.5 for more details about lists). We use _ for the anonymous
variable, that is a variable whose name is of no interest and which is distinct from
all other variables present, including all other anonymous variables.

In order to satisfy our speciﬁcation, the list, Ls, in addition to being composed
of 27 elements, must contain a sublist2 in which the number 1 appears followed by
any other number, by another occurrence of the number 1, then another number and
ﬁnally a last occurrence of the number 1. Such a sublist can be speciﬁed as

[1 , X ,1 , Y ,1]

where X and Y are variables. Exploiting again the anonymous variable, we may
write:

[1 , _ ,1 , _ ,1]

Assuming that we have available a binary predicate sublist(X,Y) whose mean-
ing is that the ﬁrst argument (X) is a sublist of the second (Y),3 our requirement
therefore can be expressed by writing:

s u b l i s t ([1 , _ ,1 , _ ,1] , Ls )

Moving on to number 2 and reasoning in a similar way, we obtain that the list Ls

must also contain the sublist:

[2 , _ , _ ,2 , _ , _2 ]

and therefore the following must also be true:

s u b l i s t ([2 , _ ,_ ,2 , _ ,_ ,2] , Ls )

Repeating this reasoning for all the other numbers up to 9, the sol program that

we want to produce can be described as follows:

1 Recall that unary means that it has a single argument while n-ary means that there are n arguments.
2 Recall that Li is a sublist of Ls if Ls is obtained by concatenating a (possibly empty) list with
Li and with another list (itself also possibly empty).
3 The deﬁnition of the relation sublist is given in Sect. 12.4.5.

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

372

sol ( Ls ) : -

l i s t _ o f _ 2 7 ( Ls ) ,
s u b l i s t ([9 , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ , _ , _ ,_ ,_ ,9 , _ , _ , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ , _ ,_ ,9] , Ls ) ,
s u b l i s t ([8 , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ , _ , _ ,_ ,8 , _ , _ , _ , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ ,8] , Ls ) ,
s u b l i s t ([7 , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ , _ , _ ,7 , _ ,_ , _ , _ , _ ,_ ,_ ,7] , Ls ) ,
s u b l i s t ([6 , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ , _ ,6 , _ ,_ ,_ , _ , _ , _ ,6] , Ls ) ,
s u b l i s t ([5 , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ ,5 , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ ,5] , Ls ) ,
s u b l i s t ([4 , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ ,4 , _ , _ ,_ ,_ ,4] , Ls ) ,
s u b l i s t ([3 , _ ,_ ,_ ,3 , _ , _ , _ ,3] , Ls ) ,
s u b l i s t ([2 , _ ,_ ,2 , _ , _ ,2] , Ls ) ,
s u b l i s t ([1 , _ ,1 , _ ,1] , Ls ).

l i s t _ o f _ 2 7 ( Ls ): -

Ls = [_ , _ , _ , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ , _ , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ , _ , _ ].

1

3

5

7

9

11

13

where, as before, the part to the right of the :- symbol is the deﬁnition of the left-
hand side. This program says that to ﬁnd a solution to our problem (sol(Ls) in
line 1), all the properties described in lines 2–11 must be satisﬁed. The comma that
separate the various predicates is to be interpreted as “and”, that is as conjunction in
the logical sense. We have given a speciﬁcation that formally repeats the formulation
of the problem and which, as we will see below, can be interpreted in purely logical
terms.

This declarative reading, for all of its elegance and compactness, would not be of
much use if it did not come together with a procedural interpretation, and thus had to
be translated into a conventional programming language. The fact of the matter is that
these (logical) speciﬁcations are to all intents and purposes executable programs. The
code described above in lines 1–14 (plus the deﬁnition of sublist in Sect. 12.4.5)
is indeed a genuine Prolog program that can be evaluated by an interpreter to obtain
the desired solution.

In other words, our speciﬁcation can also be read in a procedural fashion, as
follows. Line 1 contains the declaration of a procedure called sol; it has a single
formal parameter, Ls. The body of this procedure is deﬁned by lines 2 to 11, where we
ﬁnd ten procedure calls. On line 2, procedure list_of_27 is called with actual
parameter Ls. According to its deﬁnition, list_of_27 instantiates4 its actual
parameter into a list of 27 anonymous variables. Then, on line 3, we have the call:

s u b l i s t ([9 , _ , _ , _ , _ , _ , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ ,9 , _ ,_ ,_ ,_ ,_ ,_ ,_ ,_ , _ ,9] , Ls )

We assume that this call arranges matters so that the list which appears as the ﬁrst
parameter is a sublist of the list bound to the second parameter (Ls), possibly by
instantiating the variable Ls. Similarly for the other calls until line 11. Parameter
passing occurs in a way similar to call by name and, in Prolog, the order in which
the different procedure calls appear in the text speciﬁes the order of evaluation (in
the case of pure logic programs, on the other hand, no order is speciﬁed).

Given the preceding deﬁnition of procedure sol, the call sol(Ls) returns Ls

instantiated with a solution to the problem, such as for example the following:

4 Even if the terminology is intuitively clear: by instantiation of a variable we mean substituting for
it a syntactic object. We will give a precise deﬁnition in Sect. 12.3.

12.2 Syntax

373

1 ,9 ,1 ,2 ,1 ,8 ,2 ,4 ,6 ,2 ,7 ,9 ,4 ,5 ,8 ,6 ,3 ,4 ,7 ,5 ,3 ,9 ,6 ,8 ,3 ,5 ,7.

Successive calls to the same procedure allow obtaining the other solutions to the
problem.

With this procedural interpretation, one has a true programming language that
allows us to express, in a compact and relatively simple way, programs that solve
even complex problems. For this power, the language pays the penalty of efﬁciency.
In the preceding program, despite its apparent simplicity, the computation performed
by the language’s abstract machine is complex, given that the interpreter must try
the various combinations of possible sublists until it ﬁnds the one that satisﬁes all
the given conditions. In these search processes, a backtracking mechanism is used.
When the computation reaches at a point at which it cannot proceed, the computation
that has been performed so far is undone so that a decision point can be reached, if it
exists, at which an alternative is chosen that is different from the previous one (if this
alternative does not exist, the computation terminates in failure). It is not difﬁcult to
see that, in general, this search process can have exponential complexity.

12.2 Syntax

Logic programs are sets of logic formulæ of a particular form. We begin therefore
with some basic notions for deﬁning the syntax.

The logic of interest here is ﬁrst-order logic, also called predicate calculus. Sym-
bols are used to express properties of (or, in a more old-fashioned terminology, to
“predicate on”) elements of a ﬁxed domain of discourse, D. Higher-order logics
(second, third, etc., order) also permit predicates whose arguments are more compli-
cated objects such as sets and functions over D (second order), sets of these functions
(third order), etc., in addition to elements of D.

12.2.1 The Language of First-Order Logic

The language of ﬁrst-order logic consists of three components:

1. An alphabet.
2. Terms deﬁned over this alphabet.
3. Well-formed formulæ deﬁned over this alphabet.

Alphabet
The alphabet is a set5 of symbols, partitioned into two disjoint subsets: the set of
logical symbols (common to all ﬁrst-order languages) and the set of non-logical (or
extra-logical) symbols (which are speciﬁc to a domain of interest). For example, all

5 All the sets we consider here are ﬁnite or denumerable.

374

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

ﬁrst-order languages will use a (logical) symbol to denote conjunction. If we are
considering orderings on a set, we will probably also have the < symbol as one of
the non-logical symbols.

The set of logical symbols contains the following elements:

• The logical connectives ∧ (conjunction), ∨ (disjunction), ¬ (negation), → (impli-

cation) and ↔ (double implication).

• The propositional constants true and false.
• The quantiﬁers ∃ (exists) and ∀ (forall).
• Some punctuation symbols such as brackets “(” and “)” and comma “,”.
• An (denumerably) inﬁnite set V of variables, written X , Y , Z , . . .

The non-logical (or extra-logical) symbols are deﬁned by a signature with pred-
icates ((cid:2), (cid:3)). This is a pair in which the ﬁrst element, (cid:2) is the function signature,
that is a set of function symbols, each considered with its own arity.6 The second
element of the pair, (cid:3), is the predicate signature, a set of predicate symbols together
with their arities. Functions of arity 0 are said to be constants and are denoted by
the letters a, b, c, . . . . Function symbols of positive arity are, as usual, denoted by
f , g, h, . . . , while predicate symbols are denoted by p, q, r , . . . . Let us assume that
the sets (cid:2) and (cid:3) have an empty intersection and are also disjoint from the logical
symbols. The difference between function and predicate symbols is that the former
must be interpreted as functions, while the latter must be interpreted as relations.
This distinction will become clearer when we discuss formulæ.

Terms

The concept of term, which is fundamental to mathematical logic and Computer
Science, is used implicitly in many contexts. For example, an arithmetic expression
is a term obtained by applying (arithmetic) operators to operands. Other types of
construct, too, such as strings, binary trees, lists, and so on, can be conveniently seen
as terms which are obtained using appropriate constructors. Semantically, a term
denotes an element of the domain of discourse, D.

Syntactically, in the simplest case a term is obtained by applying a function symbol
to as many variables and constants as required by its arity. For example, if a and b
are constants, X and Y are both variables and f and g have arity 2, then f (a, b) and
g(a, X ) are terms. Nothing prevents the use of terms as the arguments to a function,
provided that the arity is respected. We can, for example, write g( f (a, b), Y ) or
g( f (a, f (X, Y )), X ) and so on.

In the most general case, we can deﬁne terms as follows.

Deﬁnition 12.1 (Term) The terms over a signature (cid:2) (and over the set, V , of vari-
ables) are deﬁned inductively7 as follows:

6 Recall that, as stated above, the arity denotes the number of arguments of a function or relation.
7 See the box on Sect. 6.4 for inductive deﬁnitions.

12.2 Syntax

375

• A variable (in V ) is a term.
• If f (in (cid:2)) is a function symbol of arity n and t1, . . . , tn are terms, then f (t1, . . . , tn)

is a term.

As a particular case of the second point, a constant is a term. According to the
letter of the deﬁnition, a term which corresponds to a constant must be written with
parentheses: a(), b(), . . . . Let us establish, for ease of reading, that in the case of
function symbols of arity 0, parentheses are omitted. Terms without variables are
said to be ground terms. Terms are usually denoted by the letters s, t, u, . . . . Note
that predicates do not appear in terms; they appear in formulæ (to express properties
of terms).

Formulæ

The well-formed formulæ (or formulæ for short) of the language allow us to express
the properties of terms. Semantically, therefore, a formula states that some elements
of our domain, D, enjoy a property. For example, if we have the predicate > (inter-
preted as usual as a partial order relation on D), writing > (3, 2) we express that the
term “3” corresponds to a value (an element of D) which is greater than the value
associated with the term “2”. More complex formulæ can be constructed using log-
ical symbols. For example, the formula > (X, Y )∧ > (Y, Z ) →> (X, Z ) expresses
the transitivity of >—if > (X, Y ) is true and > (Y, Z ) is also true then, it is the case
that > (X, Z ).

Wanting to deﬁne formulæ precisely, we have ﬁrst atomic formulæ (or atoms),
constructed by the application of a predicate to the number of terms required by its
arity. For example, if p has arity 2, using the two terms introduced above, we can write
p( f (a, b), f (a, X )). Using logical connectives and quantiﬁcation, we can construct
complex formulæ from atomic ones. As usual, we have an inductive deﬁnition (or,
equivalently, a free grammar—see Exercise 1).

Deﬁnition 12.2 (Formula) The (well-formed) formulæ over the signature with terms
((cid:2), (cid:3)) are deﬁned inductively as follows:

1. If t1, . . . , tn are terms over the signature (cid:2) and p ∈ (cid:3) is a predicate symbol of

arity n, then p(t1, . . . , pn) is a formula.

2. true and false are formulæ.
3. If F and G are formulæ, then ¬F, (F ∧ G), (F ∨ G), (F → G) and (F ↔ G)

are formulæ.

4. If F is a formula and X is a variable, then ∀X.F and ∃X.F are formulæ.

12.2.2 Logic Programs

A formula constructed according to the last deﬁnition can have a highly complex
structure. This complexity often determines also the effort required to ﬁnd a proof. In

376

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

automatic theorem proving, and in logic programming, particular classes of formulæ
have been identiﬁed, which lend to more efﬁcient manipulation. One of this classes is
the one of the clauses, which can be manipulated with a special inference rule called
resolution. We are interested in a restriction of the notion of clause, called deﬁnite
clause, as well as in a restricted forms of resolution—SLD resolution, see Sect. 12.4.3.
Using these two notions, the procedure for seeking a proof is not only particularly
simple but also allows the explicit calculation of the values of the variables necessary
for the proof. These values can be considered as the result of the computation, giving
way to an interesting model of computation based on logical deduction. We will see
this model in more detail below, for now we will concentrate on syntactic aspects.

Deﬁnition 12.3 (Logic Program) Let H , A1, . . . , An be atomic formulæ. A deﬁnite
clause (for us simply a “clause”) is a formula of the form:

H : −A1, . . . , An.
If n = 0, the clause is said to be a unit, or a fact, and the symbol : − is omitted (but
not the ﬁnal full stop). A logic program is a set of clauses, while a pure Prolog
program is an ordered sequence of clauses. A query (or goal) is a sequence of atoms
A1, . . . , An.

Let us clarify some points about this deﬁnition. First, the symbol : − which we

did not include in our alphabet, is just (reversed) implication (←).8

The commas in a clause or in a query should be interpreted as logical conjunction.
The notation “H : −A1, . . . , An.” is therefore an abbreviation for “H ← A1 ∧ · · · ∧
An.” Note that the full stop is part of the notation and is important because it tells a
potential interpreter or compiler that the clause has terminated.

The part on the left of : − is the head of the clause; that on the right is the body.
A fact is therefore a clause with an empty body. A program is a set of clauses in
the case of the theoretical formalism. In the case of Prolog, on the other hand, a
program is considered as a sequence because, as we will see, the order of clauses is
relevant. Here, we used the simpliﬁed terminology found in many recent texts (for
example, [1]). For more precise terminology, see the next box. The set of clauses
containing the predicate symbol p in their head is said to be the deﬁnition of p.
Variables occurring in the body of a clause and not in the head are said to be local
variables.

8 : − instead of ← is used for practical reasons. When logic languages were being introduced, it
was much easier to type : − rather than a left arrow, on most keyboards.

12.3 Theory of Uniﬁcation

377

Clause

The reader familiar with ﬁrst-order logic will have recognised the notion of clause given in Deﬁni-
tion 12.3 as being a particular case of the one used in logic. A clause, in the general sense, is indeed
a formula of the form:

∀X1, . . . , Xm (L 1 ∨ L 2 ∨ · · · ∨ L n)
where L 1 . . . L n are literals (atoms or negated atoms) and X1, . . . , Xn are all the variables that occur
in L 1 . . . L n. For clarity, we may separate the negated atoms from the others, therefore writing a
clause as:

∀X1, . . . , Xm (A1 ∨ A2 ∨ · · · ∨ Am , ¬B1 ∨ ¬B2 ∨ · · · ∨ ¬Bk ).
Using well-known logical equivalences, we can express this formula in the following equivalent
form;

A1, . . . Am ← B1, . . . , Bk .
A program clause, also called a deﬁnite clause, is a clause that has only one un-negated atom. In the
form shown in (12.1), a deﬁnite clause always has m = 1, which is the notion introduced directly in
Deﬁnition 12.3. A fact is therefore a deﬁnite clause containing no negated atoms. Finally, a negative
clause, also called a query or goal, is a clause of the form (12.1) in which m = 0.

(12.1)

12.3 Theory of Uniﬁcation

The fundamental computational mechanism in logic programming is the solution of
equations between terms using the uniﬁcation procedure. In this procedure, substi-
tutions are computed so that variables and terms can be bound (or instantiated). The
composition of the different substitutions obtained in the course of a computation
provides the result of the calculation. Before seeing the computational model for
logic programming in detail, we must analyse uniﬁcation in a little detail, a task we
undertake in this section.

12.3.1 The Logic Variable

Let us clarify, ﬁrst, that the concept of variable we are considering is different from
that seen in Sect. 6.2.1. Here, we consider the so-called logic variable, an unknown
which can assume values from a predetermined set. In our case, this set is that of
deﬁnite terms over the given alphabet. This fact, together with the use that logic
programming makes of logic variables, gives rise to three important differences
between logic variables and modiﬁable variables of imperative languages.

1. The logic variable can be bound only once, in the sense that if a variable is bound
to a term, this binding cannot be destroyed (but the term might be modiﬁed, as
will be explained below). For example, if we bind the variable X to the constant
a in a logic program, the binding cannot later be replaced by another which
binds X to the constant b. Clearly, this is possible in imperative languages using
assignment. The fact that the binding of a variable cannot be eliminated does

378

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

not mean, however, that it is impossible to modify the value of the variable. This
apparent contradiction is dealt with in the next point.

2. The value of a logic variable can be partially deﬁned (or can be undeﬁned), to
be speciﬁed later. This is because a term that is bound to a variable can contain,
in its turn, other logic variables. For example, if the variable X is bound to the
term f (Y, Z ), successive bindings of the variables Y and Z will also modify
the value of the variable X : if Y is bound to a and Z is bound to g(W ), the
value of X will become the term f (a, g(W )). The process could continue by
modifying the value of W . This mechanism for specifying the value of a variable
by successive approximations, so to speak, is typical of logic languages and
is somewhat different from the corresponding one encountered in imperative
languages, where a value assigned to a value cannot be partially deﬁned.

3. A third important difference concerns the bidirectional nature of bindings for
logic variables. If X is bound to the term f (Y ) and later we are able to bind X
to the term f (a), the effect so produced is that of binding the variable Y to the
constant a. This does not contradict the ﬁrst point, given that the binding of X
to the term f (Y ) is not destroyed, but the value of f (Y ) is speciﬁed through
the binding of Y . Therefore, we can not only modify the value of a variable by
modifying the term to which it is bound, but we can also modify this term by
providing another binding for that variable. Clearly, this second binding must
be consistent with the ﬁrst, that is if X is bound to the term f (Y ), we cannot try
to bind X to a term of the form g(Z ).

The last point is fundamental, since it allows us to use a single logic program
in quite different ways, as will be seen below. Essentially, we are talking about a
property that derives from the uniﬁcation mechanism, which we will discuss shortly.
First, however, we must introduce the concept of substitution.

12.3.2 Substitution

The connection between variables and terms is made in terms of the concept of
substitution, which, as its name tells us, allows the “substitution” of a variable by a
term. A substitution, usually denoted by the greek letters ϑ, σ , ρ, . . . , can be deﬁned
as follows.

Deﬁnition 12.4 (Substitution) A substitution is a function from variables to terms
such that the number of variables which are not mapped to themselves is ﬁnite. We
denote a substitution ϑ by the notation:

ϑ = {X1/t1, . . . , Xn/tn}
where X1, . . . , Xn are different variables, t1, . . . , tn are terms and where we assume
that ti is different from Xi , for i = 1, . . . , n.

12.3 Theory of Uniﬁcation

379

In the preceding deﬁnition, a pair Xi /ti is said to be a binding.9 In the case in
which all the t1, . . . , tn are ground terms, then ϑ is said to be a ground substitution.
We write (cid:7) for the empty substitution. For ϑ represented as in Deﬁnition 12.4, we
deﬁne the domain, codomain and variables of a substitution as follows:

Domain(ϑ) = {X1, . . . , Xn},
Codomain(ϑ) = {Y | Y a variable in ti , for some ti , 1 ≤ i ≤ n}.

A substitution can be applied to a term, or, more generally, to any syntactic expres-
sion, to modify the value of the variables present in the domain of the substitution.
More precisely, if we consider an expression, E (which could be a term, a literal, a
conjunction of atoms, etc.), the result of the application of ϑ = {X1/t1, . . . , Xn/tn}
to E, denoted by Eϑ, is obtained by simultaneously replacing every occurrence
of Xi in E by the corresponding ti , for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. For example, if we apply
the substitution ϑ = {X/a, Y / f (W )} to the term g(X, W, Y ), we obtain the term
g(X, W, Y )ϑ, that is g(a, W, f (W )). Note that the application is simultaneous. For
example, if we apply the substitution σ = {Y / f (X ), X/a} to the term g(X, Y ), we
obtain g(a, f (X )) (and not g(a, f (a))).

The composition, ϑσ , of two substitutions ϑ = {X1/t1, . . . , Xn/tn} and σ =
{Y1/s1, . . . , Ym/sm} is deﬁned as the substitution obtained by removing from the set
{X1/t1σ, . . . , Xn/tnσ, Y1/s1, . . . , Ym/sm}
the pairs Xi /ti σ such that Xi is equal to ti σ and the pairs Yi /si such that Yi ∈
{X1, . . . , Xn}. Composition is associative and it is not difﬁcult to see that, for any
expression, E, it is the case that E(ϑσ ) = (Eϑ)σ . The effect of the application
of a composition is the same as it is obtained by successively applying the two
substitutions that we want to compose.

For example, composing

ϑ1 = {X/ f (Y ), W/a, Z / X } and ϑ2 = {Y /b, W/b, X/Z }

we obtain the substitution

ϑ = ϑ1ϑ2 = {X/ f (b), W/a, Y /b}.
If we apply the latter to the term g(X, Y, W ), we obtain the term g( f (b), b, a).
The same term is obtained ﬁrst by applying ϑ1 to g(X, Y, W ), then applying ϑ2 to
the result. Note that, in the result ϑ of the composition, the Y in ϑ1 is instantiated
to b because of the binding occurring in ϑ2. The X occurring in Z / X is instantiated
to Z using the binding X/Z in ϑ2, after which the binding Z /Z is eliminated from
the resulting substitution (because it is the identity). The bindings W/b and X/Z

9 We are using here an “opposite” notation of the one we used in the context of the λ-calculus,
Sect. 11.6. There, according to the prevalent tradition in functional languages, we wrote N / X for
the substitution of the term N in place of the variable X . Here such a binding is written X/N (i.e.,
backwards). In this chapter we will use the latter notation, which is the one most commonly used
in logic programming.

380

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

present in ϑ2 ﬁnally disappear from ϑ because both W and Z appear in the domain
(or, on the left of a binding) in ϑ1.

A particular type of substitution is formed from those which simply rename
their variables. For example, the substitution {X/W, W/ X } does nothing more than
change the names of the variables X and W . Substitutions like this are called renam-
ings and can be deﬁned as follows.

Deﬁnition 12.5 (Renaming) A substitution ρ is a renaming if its inverse substitution
ρ−1 exists and is such that ρρ−1 = ρ−1ρ = (cid:7).

Note that the substitution {X/Y, W/Y } is not a renaming. Indeed, it not only
changes the names of the two variables, but also makes the two variables equal,
while they were previously distinct.

Finally, it will be useful to deﬁne a preorder, ≤, over substitutions, where ϑ ≤ σ
is read as: ϑ is more general than σ . Let us therefore deﬁne ϑ ≤ σ if (and only if)
there exists a substitution γ such that ϑγ = σ . Analogously, given two expressions,
t and t (cid:11), we deﬁne t ≤ t (cid:11) (t is more general t (cid:11)) if and only if there exists a ϑ such that
tϑ = t (cid:11). The relation ≤ is a preorder and the equivalence induced by it10 is called the
variance; t and t (cid:11) are therefore variants if t is an instance of t (cid:11) and, conversely, t (cid:11) is
an instance of t. It is not difﬁcult to see that this deﬁnition is equivalent to saying that
t and t (cid:11) are variants if there exists a renaming ρ such that t is syntactically identical
to t (cid:11)ρ. These deﬁnitions can be extended to any expression in an obvious fashion.
Finally, if ϑ is a substitution that has as domain the set of variables V , and W is a
subset of V , the restriction of ϑ to the variables in W is the substitution obtained by
considering only the bindings for variables in W , that is the substitution deﬁned as
follows:

{Y /t | Y ∈ W and Y /t ∈ ϑ}.

A comparison with the imperative paradigm can help in better understanding the
concepts under consideration. As we saw in Sect. 2.5, in the imperative paradigm,
the semantics can be expressed by referring to a concept of state that associates every
variable with a value.11 An expression containing variables is evaluated with respect
to a state to obtain a value that is completely deﬁned.

In the logic paradigm, the association of values with variables is implemented
through substitutions. The application of a substitution to a term (or to a more complex
expression) can be seen as the evaluation of the terms, an evaluation that returns
another term, and therefore, in general, a partially deﬁned value.

10 Given a preorder, ≤, the equivalence relation induced by ≤ is deﬁned as t = t (cid:11) if and only if
t ≤ t (cid:11) and t (cid:11) ≤ t.
11 Wishing to be precise, as we have seen in the box on Sect. 6.3, in real languages, this association
is implemented using two functions, environment and memory. This however does not alter the
import of what we are saying.

12.3 Theory of Uniﬁcation

381

12.3.3 Most General Uniﬁer

The basic computation mechanism for the logic paradigm is the evaluation of equa-
tions of the form s = t,12 where s and t are terms and “=” is a predicate symbol
interpreted as syntactic equality over the set of all ground terms; this set is called the
Herbrand Universe.13 We will attempt better to clarify this equality.

If we write X = a in a logic program, we mean that the variable X must be bound
to the constant a. The substitution {X/a} therefore is a solution to this equation since,
by applying the substitution to the equation, we obtain a = a which is a syntactical
identity. You should not be deceived by the syntactic analogy with assignment in
imperative languages, for it deals with a completely different concept. Indeed, unlike
in an imperative language, here we can also write a = X instead of X = a and the
meaning does not change (the equality that we are considering is symmetric, as are
all equality relations). Also the analogy with the equality of arithmetic expressions
can be, in some ways, misleading, as illustrated by the following example.

Let us assume that we have a binary function symbol + which, intuitively,
expresses the sum of two natural numbers, and consider the equation 3 = 2 + 1,
where, for simplicity, we use inﬁx notation for + and we represent in the usual fash-
ion the natural numbers. Given that the equation 3 = 2+1 does not contain variables,
it can be either true (or, solved) or false (that is, insoluble). Contrary to what arith-
metic intuition would suggest to us, in a (pure) logic program this equation cannot
be solved. This is because, as we have said, the symbol = is interpreted as syntactic
equality over the set of ground terms (the Herbrand universe). It is clear that, from
the syntactic viewpoint, the constant 3 is different from the term 2 + 1 and since they
are treated as ground terms (that is completely instantiated terms) there is no way that
they can be made syntactically equal. Analogously, the equation f (X ) = g(Y ) has
no solutions (it is not solvable) because however the variables X and Y are instanti-
ated, we cannot make the two different function symbols, f and g, equal. Note that
the equation, f (X ) = f (g(X )), also has no solutions, because the variable X in the
left-hand term must be instantiated with g(X ) and therefore the possible solution
must contain the substitution {X/g(X )}. The application of this substitution to the
term on the right would instantiate X , producing the term f (g(g(X ))), so the X in
the right-hand term would have to be instantiated to g(g(X )) rather than to g(X ) and
so on, without ever reaching a solution.14 In general, therefore, the equation X = t
cannot be solved if t contains the variable X (and t is different from X ).

12 We draw attention to the notation that, as usual, overloads the “=” symbol. By writing ϑ =
{X1/t1, . . . , Xn/tn}, we mean that ϑ is the substitution {X1/t1, . . . , Xn/tn}, while writing s = t,
we mean an equation.
13 The symbol “=” is usually written in inﬁx notation for increased readability. Different logic
languages can have different syntactic readings for it and use different equality symbols, each with
a different meaning. Here, we refer to “pure” logic programming.
14 By admitting inﬁnite terms, we can ﬁnd a solution, however.

382

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

On the other hand, the equation f (X ) = f (g(Y )) is solvable. One solution is
the substitution ϑ = {X/g(Y )} because if this is applied to the two terms in the
equation, it makes them syntactically equal. Indeed, f (X )ϑ is identical to f (g(Y ))
which is identical to f (g(Y ))ϑ. In more formal terms, we can say that the substitu-
tion ϑ uniﬁes the two terms of the equation—ϑ is a uniﬁer. We have said “a solution”
because there are many substitutions (an inﬁnite number of them) that are uniﬁers
of X and g(Y ). It is sufﬁcient to instantiate Y in the deﬁnition of ϑ. So, for exam-
ple, the substitution {X/g(a), Y /a} is also an uniﬁer, as are {X/g( f (Z )), Y / f (Z )},
{X/g( f (a)), Y / f (a)}, and so on. All these substitutions are, however, less general
than ϑ according to the preorder that we deﬁned above. Each of them, that is, can be
obtained by composing ϑ with some other, appropriate, substitution. For example,
{X/g(a), Y /a} is equal to ϑ{Y /a} (remember that we denote the composition of
substitutions with juxtaposition). In this sense, we say that ϑ is the most general
uniﬁer (or m.g.u.) of X and g(Y ).

Before moving to general deﬁnitions, note one last important detail: the process
of solving an equation (the uniﬁcation process), can create bidirectional bindings,
that is the direction in which the associations must be realised is not speciﬁed. For
example, a solution of the equation f (X, a) = f (b, Y ) is given by the substitution
{X/b, Y /a}, where a variable on the left and one on the right of the = symbol are
bound. Instead, in the equation, f (X, a) = f (Y, a), to ﬁnd a solution, we can choose
whether to bind the variable on the left (using {X/Y }) or the one on the right (using
{Y / X }) or even both (using {X/Z , Y /Z }).

This aspect, to which we will return, is important because it allows the imple-
mentation of bidirectional parameter-passing mechanisms. It allows also a unique
characteristic of the logic paradigm—to use the same program in different ways,
turning input arguments into outputs and vice versa, without modifying the program.

We may now give the formal deﬁnition.

Deﬁnition 12.6 (M.g.u.) Given a set of equations E = {s1 = t1, . . . , sn = tn},
where s1, . . . , sn and t1, . . . , tn are terms, the substitution, ϑ, is a uniﬁer for E if
the sequence (s1, . . . , sn)ϑ and (t1, . . . , tn)ϑ are syntactically identical. A uniﬁer
of E is said to be the most general uniﬁer (m.g.u.) if it is more general than any
other uniﬁer of E; that is, for every other uniﬁer, σ , of E, σ is equal to ϑτ for some
substitution, τ .

The preceding concept of uniﬁer can be extended to other syntactic objects in an
obvious fashion. In particular, we say that ϑ is a uniﬁer of two atoms p(s1, . . . , sn)
and p(t1, . . . , tn) if ϑ is a uniﬁer of {s1 = t1, . . . , sn = tn}.

12.3 Theory of Uniﬁcation

383

12.3.4 A Uniﬁcation Algorithm

An important result, due to Robinson in 1965, shows that the problem of determin-
ing whether a set of equations of terms can be uniﬁed is decidable. The proof is
constructive, in the sense that it provides a uniﬁcation algorithm which, for every set
of equations, produces their m.g.u. if the set is uniﬁable and returns a failure in the
opposite case.15

It can also be proved that a m.g.u.

is unique up to renaming. The uniﬁcation
algorithm which we will now see is not Robinson’s original but is Martelli and
Montanari’s from 1982 and it makes use of ideas present in Herbrand’s thesis of
1930.

Martelli and Montanari’s Uniﬁcation Algorithm

Given a set of equations

E = {s1 = t1, . . . , sn = tn},

the algorithm produces either failure or a set of equations in the following, so called,
solved form:

{X1 = r1, . . . , Xm = rm},
where X1, . . . , Xm are distinct variables not appearing in the terms r1, . . . , rm. The
set of equations is equivalent to the starting set, E, and from it we can obtain a
m.g.u. for E simply interpreting every equality as a binding. Therefore, the m.g.u. that
we seek is the substitution:

{X1/r1, . . . , Xm/rm}.

The algorithm is non-deterministic in the sense that when there are more possible
actions, one is chosen in an arbitrary fashion, with no priority between the various
actions.16 The algorithm is given by the following steps.

1. Nondeterministically select one equation from the set E.
2. According to the type of equation chosen, execute, if possible, one of the speciﬁc
operations as follows (where on the left of the “:” we indicate the type of equation
and, on the right, the associated action):

a.

b.

f (l1, . . . , lk) = f (m1, . . . , mk): eliminate this equation from the set E and
add to E the equations l1 = m1, . . . , lk = mk.
f (l1, . . . , lk) = g(m1, . . . , mk): if f
failure.

is different from g, terminate with

15 Robinson’s original algorithm considers the uniﬁcation of just two terms but this, obviously, is
not reductive given that the uniﬁcation of {s1 = t1, . . . , sn = tn} can be seen as the uniﬁcation of
f (s1, . . . , sn) and f (t1, . . . , tn).
16 We will return to the non-determinism brieﬂy when we discuss the operational semantics of logic
programs.

384

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

c. X = X : eliminate this equation from the set E.
d. X = t: if t does not contain the variable X and this variable appears in another
equation in the set E, apply the substitution {X/t} to all the other equations
in the set E.

e. X = t: if t contains the variable X , terminate with failure.
f. t = X : if t is not a variable, eliminate this equation from the set E and add

to E the equation X = t.

3. If none of the preceding operations is possible, terminate with success (E con-
tains the solved form). If, on the other hand, an operation different from termi-
nation with failure has been executed, go to (1).

This is a simple algorithm, but it is worth discussing in in detail its steps.
In the ﬁrst case the two terms agree on the function symbol. To unify the two
terms, it is necessary to unify the arguments, so we replace the original equation
with the equations obtained by equating the arguments in each position. Note that
this case also includes equivalence between constants of the form a = a (where a is
a function symbol of arity 0) which are eliminated without adding anything.

The second case produces a failure given that, when f and g are different, the two

terms cannot be uniﬁed.

The equation X = X is eliminated using the identity substitution which therefore

produces no change in the other equations.

The fourth case is the most interesting. An equation X = t is already in solved
form (because, by assumption, t does not contain X ). In other words, the substitution
{X/t} is the m.g.u. of this very equation. We need to combine the effect of such an
m.g.u. with those produced by other equations, so we apply the substitution {X/t}
to all the other equations in E.

On the other hand, in the case in which t contains the variable X , as we have
already seen, the equation has no solution and therefore the algorithm terminates
with failure. It is important to note that this check, called the occurs check, is removed
from many implementations of Prolog for reasons of efﬁciency. Therefore, many
Prolog implementations use an incorrect uniﬁcation algorithm!

The last case, ﬁnally, serves only to obtain a result form in which the variables

appear on the left and the terms on the right of the = symbol.

It is easy to convince oneself that the algorithm terminates, given that the depth of
the input terms is ﬁnite. It is, moreover, possible to prove that the algorithm produces
an m.g.u. which is obtained by the interpretation as substitutions of the ﬁnal result
form of the equations.

By a careful consideration of the algorithm, it can be seen that the computation
of the most general uniﬁer occurs in an incremental fashion by solving ever simpler
equations until a result form is encountered. It is also possible to express this process
in terms of substitution compositions as happens in the operational model of logic
languages. We will exemplify this point with an example. To simplify, we will always
choose the leftmost equation (the ﬁnal result, anyway, does not depend upon such an
assumption; any other selection rule would lead to the same result up to renaming).

12.3 Theory of Uniﬁcation

385

Let us consider the set of equations:

E = { f (X, b) = f (g(Y ), W ), h(X, Y ) = h(Z , W )}.
Choosing the ﬁrst equation on the left, using the operation described in (a), the set
E is transformed into:

E1 = {X = g(Y ), b = W, h(X, Y ) = h(Z , W )}.

Using operation (d), we therefore obtain:

E2 = {X = g(Y ), b = W, h(g(Y ), Y ) = h(Z , W )}.

Using (f) and then (d) again on the second equation, we ﬁnally obtain:

E3 = {X = g(Y ), W = b, h(g(Y ), Y ) = h(Z , b)}.
This already contains the result of the ﬁrst equation in the set E. In fact, the substi-
tution:

ϑ1 = {X/g(Y ), W/b}

is an m.g.u. for f (X, b) = f (g(Y ), W ).

Continuing with the second equation from the original set, suitably instantiated

by the substitutions already computed, using operation (a), we obtain:

E4 = {X = g(Y ), W = b, g(Y ) = Z , Y = b};

then, by (f), we obtain:

E5 = {X = g(Y ), W = b, Z = g(Y ), Y = b}.

Finally, using (d) applied to the last equation, we have:

E4 = {X = g(b), W = b, Z = g(b), Y = b},
which is the result form for the set E and therefore also provides the m.g.u. of the
initial set in the form of the substitution

ϑ = {X/g(b), W/b, Z /g(b), Y /b}.
Two important observations can be made. First, note how the value of some
variables can be partially speciﬁed ﬁrst, and then later reﬁned. For example, ϑ1
(m.g.u. of the ﬁrst equation in E) tells us that X has g(Y ) as its value and only by
solving the second equation do we see that Y has b as its value. Therefore it can be
seen that g(b) is the value of X (as, indeed, it results in the ﬁnal m.g.u.).

Moreover, we can see that if we consider {h(g(X ), Y ) = h(Z , W )}ϑ1 (the second

equation in E instantiated using the m.g.u. of the ﬁrst), we obtain the equation

h(g(Y ), Y ) = h(Z , b)

for which the substitution

ϑ2 = {Z = g(b), Y = b}
is a m.g.u. Using the deﬁnition of composition of substitutions, it is easy to check
that ϑ = ϑ1ϑ2. The m.g.u. of the set E can therefore be obtained by composing the
ﬁrst equation’s m.g.u. with that of the second (to which the ﬁrst m.g.u. has already
been applied). This, as we have already said, is what, indeed, normally happens in
implementations of logic languages, where, instead of accumulating all the equations
and then solve them, an m.g.u. is computed on each step of the computation and is
composed with the ones that were previously obtained.

386

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

12.4 The Computational Model

The logic paradigm, implementing the idea of “computation as deduction”, uses a
computational model that is substantially different from all the others that we have
seen so far. Wishing to synthesise, we can identify the following main differences
from the other paradigms:

1. The only possible values, at least in the pure model, are terms over a given

signature.

2. Programs can have a declarative reading which is entirely logical, or a procedural

reading of an operational kind.

3. Computation works by instantiating the variables appearing in terms (and there-

fore in goals) to other terms using the uniﬁcation mechanism.

4. Control, which is entirely handled by the abstract machine (except for some pos-
sible annotations in Prolog) is based on the process of automatic backtracking.

Below, we analyse these four points. We will explicitly discuss the differences

between logic programming and Prolog.

12.4.1 The Herbrand Universe

In logic programming, terms are a fundamental element. The set of all possible terms
over a given signature is called the Herbrand Universe and is the domain over which
computation in logic programs is performed. It has some characteristics that must
be understood.

• The alphabet over which programs are deﬁned is not ﬁxed but can vary as far as

non-logical symbols are concerned.

• As a (partial) consequence of the previous point, unlike what happens in imperative
languages, no predeﬁned meaning is assigned to the (non-logical) symbols of the
alphabet. For example, a program can use the + symbol to denote addition, while
another program can use the same symbol to denote string concatenation. The
exceptions are the (binary) equality predicate and some other predeﬁned (“built-
in”) symbols in Prolog.17

• As a ﬁnal consequence, no type system is present in logic languages (at least in
the classic formalism). The only type that is present is that of terms with which
we can represent arithmetic, list, expressions, etc.

17 As well as predeﬁned predicates in constraint languages, as we will see in the next chapter.

12.4 The Computational Model

387

From the theoretical stance, the fact that there are no types and that computation
occurs in the Herbrand Universe is not limiting, rather it permits the highly elegant
and, all considered, simple expression of the formal semantics of logic programs. For
example, with only two function symbols, 0 (constant zero) and s (successor, of arity
1), we can express the natural numbers using the terms 0, s(0), s(s(0)), s(s(s(0))),
etc. With a little effort, we can express the normal arithmetic operations in terms of
this two-symbol representation.

From the practical view point, on the other hand, the lack of types is a serious
problem. In fact, in Prolog, as in other, more recent, logic languages, some prim-
itive types have been introduced (for example, integers and associated arithmetic
operations). The languages of this paradigm are therefore always somewhat lacking
as far as types are concerned.

12.4.2 Declarative and Procedural Interpretation

As we have just hinted, a clause, and therefore a logic program, can have two different
interpretations: one declarative and one procedural.

From the declarative viewpoint, a clause H : −A1, . . . , An is a formula which
expresses that if A1 and A2 and . . . and An are true, then H is also true. A query (or
goal) is also a formula for which we want to prove, provided that it is appropriately
instantiated, that it is a logical consequence of the program, and is, therefore, true in all
interpretations in which the program is true.18 This interpretation can be developed
using the methods of logic (in particular, some elementary concepts of model theory)
in such a way as to give a meaning to a program in purely declarative terms without
referring at all to a computational process. For this interpretation, while interesting,
we refer the reader to the specialist literature cited at the end of the chapter.

The procedural interpretation, on the other hand, allows us to read a clause such

as:

H : −A1, . . . , An
as follows. To prove H , it is necessary ﬁrst to prove A1, . . . , An, or rather to compute
H , it is necessary ﬁrst to compute A1, . . . , An. From this, we can view a predicate
as the name of a procedure, whose deﬁning clauses constitute its body. In this inter-
pretation, we can read an atom in the body of a clause, or in a goal, as a procedure
call. A logic program is therefore a set of declarations and a goal is no more than the
equivalent of “main” in an imperative program, given that it contains all the calls to
the procedures that we want to evaluate. The comma in the body of clauses and in
goals, in Prolog (but not in other pure logic programming languages), can be read
as the analogue of “;” in imperative languages.

18 Here we will content ourselves with an intuitive idea of this concept. The interested reader can
consult any text on logic for more information.

388

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

Precise correspondence theorems allow us to reconcile the declarative and proce-

dural views, proving that the two approaches are equivalent.

From a formal viewpoint, the procedural interpretation is supported by so-called
SLD resolution, a logical inference rule which we will discuss in the box on
Sect. 12.4.3. It is also possible to describe the procedural interpretation in a more
informal manner, using only the analogy with procedure calls and parameter passing
which we have just outlined. This is the approach we will use below.

12.4.3 Procedure Calls

Let us consider for now a simpliﬁed deﬁnition of clause in which we assume that, in
the head, all the arguments of the predicate are distinct variables. An arbitrary clause
of this type therefore has the form:

p(X1, . . . , Xn) : −A1, . . . , Am
and, as we have anticipated, it can be seen as the declaration of the procedure p
with n formal parameters, X1, . . . , Xn. An atom q(t1, . . . , tn) can be seen as a call
to the procedure q with n actual parameters, t1, . . . , tn. In the deﬁnition of p, there-
fore, the body is formed from the calls to m procedures which constitute the atoms
A1, . . . , Am.

In accordance with this view, and analogously to what happens in imperative
languages, the evaluation of the call p(t1, . . . , tn) causes the evaluation of the body
of the procedure after parameter passing has been performed. Parameter passing
uses a technique similar to call by name, replacing the formal parameter Xi with
the corresponding actual parameter ti . Moreover, given that the variables appearing
in the body of the procedure are to be considered as logical variables, they can be
considered to be distinct from all other variables. In block-structured languages, this
happens implicitly given that the body of the procedure is considered as a block with
its own local environment. Here, on the other hand, the concept of block is absent,
so, in order to avoid conﬂicts between variable names, we assume that, before using
a clause, all the variables appearing in it are systematically renamed (so that they do
not conﬂict with any others).

Using more precise terms, we can say that the evaluation of the call p(t1, . . . , tn),

with the deﬁnition of p seen above, causes the evaluation of the m calls:

(A1, . . . , Am)ϑ

present in the body of p, appropriately instantiated by the substitution

ϑ = {X1/t1, . . . , Xn/tn}

which performs parameter passing. In the case in which the body of the clause is
empty (or that m = 0), the procedure call terminates immediately. Otherwise, the

12.4 The Computational Model

389

computation proceeds with the evaluation of the new calls. Using logic program-
ming terminology, this can be expressed by saying that the evaluation of the goal
p(t1, . . . , tn) produces the new goal:

(A1, . . . , Am){X1/t1, . . . , Xn/tn}

which, in its turn, will have to be evaluated. When all the calls generated by this
process have been evaluated (provided there has been no failure), the computation
terminates with success and the ﬁnal result is composed of the substitution that
associates the values computed in the course of the computation with the variables
present in the initial call (X1, . . . , Xn, in our case). This substitution is said to be
the computed answer for the initial goal in the given program. We will see a more
precise deﬁnition of this concept below. For now, we will see a simple example. Let
us consider the procedure list_of_2 deﬁned below and identical to the procedure
list_of_27 of Sect. 12.1.1, except for the lesser number of anonymous variables:

l i s t _ o f _ 2 ( Ls ): - Ls = [ _ , _ ].

1

The evaluation of the call list_of_2(LXs) causes the evaluation of the body

of the clause, instantiated by the substitution {Ls/L X s}, that is:

LXs = [ _ , _ ]

This is a particular call because = is a predeﬁned predicate which, as we saw in the
previous section, is interpreted as syntactic equality over the Herbrand Universe and,
operationally, corresponds to the uniﬁcation operation. The previous call therefore
reduces to the attempt (performed by the language interpreter) to solve the equation
using uniﬁcation. In our case, clearly, this attempt succeeds and produces the m.g.u.
{L X s/[_, _]} which is the result of the computation. The previous substitution is
therefore the computed answer for the goal list_of_2 in the logic program deﬁned
by the single line (1) above.

Evaluation of a Non-atomic Goal

The view presented in the previous subsection must be generalised and made more
precise to clarify the logic-programming computational model. Below, in order to
conform with current terminology, we will talk of atomic goals and goals rather than
procedure calls and sequences of calls. The analogy with the conventional paradigm
remains valid, though.

In the case in which a non-atomic goal must be evaluated, the computational
mechanism is analogous to the one seen above, except that now we must choose
one of the possible calls using some selection rule. While in the case of pure logic
programming no such rule is speciﬁed, Prolog adopts the rule that the leftmost
atom is always chosen. It is however possible to prove that whatever rule is adopted,
the results that are computed are always the same (see also Exercises 13 and 14 at
the end of the chapter).

390

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

Assuming, for simplicity, that we adopt the Prolog rule, we can describe the

progress of the evaluation process. Let

B1, . . . , Bk
with k ≥ 1, be the goal to be evaluated. We distinguish the following cases according
to the form of the selected atom, B1:

1. If B1 is an equation of the form s = t, try to compute a m.g.u.

(using the

uniﬁcation algorithm). There are two possibilities:
a. If the m.g.u. exists and is the substitution σ , then the result of the evaluation

is the goal:

(B2, . . . , Bk)σ

obtained from the previous one by eliminating the chosen atom and applying
the m.g.u. thus computed. If k = 1 (and therefore (B2, . . . , Bk)σ is empty),
the computation terminates in success.

b. If the m.g.u. does not exist (or the equation has no solutions), then we have

failure.

2. If, on the other hand, B1 has the form p(t1, . . . , tn), we have the following two

cases:

a. If, in the program, there exists a clause of the form:

p(X1, , . . . , Xn) : −A1, . . . , Am

(which we consider renamed to avoid variable capture), then the result of
evaluation is a new goal:

(A1, . . . , Am)ϑ, B2, . . . , Bk
where ϑ = {X1/t1, . . . , Xn/tn}. If k = 1 (then we have an atomic goal) and
m = 0 (the body of the clause is empty), then the computation terminates
with success.

b. If, in the program, there exists no clause deﬁning the predicate p, we have

failure.

To be able exactly to deﬁne the results of the computation (the computed answers),
we need to clarify some aspects of control, which we will do in Sect. 12.4.4.

12.4 The Computational Model

391

SLD Resolution

Deﬁnite clauses allow a natural procedural reading based on resolution, an inference rule which
is complete for sets of clauses and which was introduced by Robinson and used in automated
deduction. In logic programming, we have SLD resolution, that is linear resolution guided by a
clause selection rule (SLD is an acronym for Selection rule-driven Linear resolution for Deﬁnite
clauses).

This rule can be described as follows. Let G be the goal B1, . . . , Bk and let C be the (deﬁnite)
clause H : −A1, . . . , An. We say that G(cid:11) is derived from G and C using ϑ or, equivalently, G(cid:11) is a
resolvent of G and C if (and only if) the following conditions are met:

1. Bm , with 1 ≤ m ≤ k, is a selected atom from those in G.
2. ϑ is the m.g.u. of Bm and H .
3. G(cid:11) is the goal (B1, . . . , Bm−1, A1, . . . , An, Bm+1, . . . Bk )ϑ.

Note that, unlike Sect. 12.4.3, here it is necessary also to apply ϑ to the other atoms occurring in
the goal G because the heads of the clauses contain arbitrary terms and therefore ϑ could instantiate
variables that are also in the goal.

Given a goal, G, and a logic program, P, an SLD derivation of P ∪ G consists of a (possibly
inﬁnite) sequence of goals G0, G1, G2, . . . , of a sequence C1, C2, . . . of clauses in P which have
been renamed in such a way as to avoid variable capture and a sequence ϑ1, ϑ2, . . . , of m.g.u. s such
that G0 is G and, for i ≥ 1, every Gi , is derived from Gi−1 and Ci using ϑi . An SLD refutation of
P ∪ G is a ﬁnite SLD derivation of P ∪ G which has the empty clause as the last resolvent of the
derivation. If ϑ1, ϑ2, . . . are the m.g.u. s used in the refutation of P ∪ G, we say that the substitution
ϑ1ϑ2 · · · ϑn restricted to the variables occurring in G is the computed answer substitution for P ∪ G
(or for the goal G in the program P).

Classic results, due to K. L. Clark, show that this rule is sound and complete with respect to the

traditional ﬁrst-order logical interpretation.

Indeed, it can be proved that if ϑ is the computed answer substitution for the goal G in program
P, then Gϑ is a logical consequence of P (soundness). Moreover, if Gϑ is a logical consequence
of P, then no matter which selection rule is used, there exists a SLD refutation of P ∪ G with
computed answer σ such that Gσ is more general than Gϑ (strong completeness).

Heads with Arbitrary Terms

So far, we have assumed that the heads of clauses contain just distinct variables.
We have made this choice to preserve the similarity with procedures in traditional
languages. However, real logic programs also use arbitrary terms as arguments to
predicates in heads, as we have seen in the example in Sect. 12.1.1. The box on
Sect. 12.4.3 provides the evaluation rule for such a general case. Note, however, that
our assumption is in no way limiting (apart, perhaps, from textual convenience).
Indeed, as it is clear from what was said in the box and from the preceding treatment,
a clause of the form:

p(t1, . . . , tn) : −A1, . . . , Am

can be seen as an abbreviation of the clause:

p(X1, . . . , Xn) : −X1 = t1, . . . , Xn = tn, A1, . . . , Am.

392

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

In the following examples, we will often use the notation with arbitrary terms in

heads.

12.4.4 Control: Non-determinism

In the evaluation of a goal, we have two degrees of freedom: the selection of the
atom to evaluate and the choice of the clause to apply.

For the ﬁrst, we have said that we can ﬁx a selection rule, without inﬂuencing the
ﬁnal results of the computation that terminate in success. For this reason, the non
determinism arising from the selection of the atom is called “don’t care”.

For the selection of clauses, on the other hand, the matter is more delicate. Given
that a predicate can be deﬁned by more than one clause, and that we have to use only
one of them at a time, we could think about ﬁxing some rule for choosing clauses,
analogous to the one used to choose atoms. The following program reveals however
a problem. Let Pa be the program:

p ( X ): - p ( X ).
p ( X ): - X = a .

1

2

and let us assume that we choose clauses from top to bottom, following the textual
order of the program. It is easy to see that by adopting this rule, the evaluation of
p(Y) never terminates and therefore we do not have a computed answer by the
program. Indeed, using clause (1) and the substitution {X/Y }, the initial goal, after
one computation step, becomes the goal p(Y), which is again the starting goal.
According to the clause-selection rule, we must choose clause (1) and apply it to this
(new) goal, and so on. It is however clear that using clause (2) we would immediately
obtain a terminating computation, producing the substitution {Y /a} as result. Note
that to ﬁx another order, for example, from bottom to top, would not in general solve
this problem.

In the light of this example, let us carefully reconsider the evaluation rule for a
goal seen in the previous subsection and, in particular, let us ﬁx on point 2(a), where
we wrote “if there exists a clause” without specifying how this can be chosen. By
doing this, we have therefore introduced into the computation model a form of non-
determinism: in the case in which there is more than one clause for the same predicate,
we can choose one in a non-deterministic fashion, without adopting any particular
rule. This form of non-determinism is called “don’t know” non-determinism, because
we do not know which the “right” clause will be that allows the termination of the
computation with success. The theoretical model of logic programming keeps this
non-determinism when it considers all possible choices of clause and therefore all
possible results of the various computations that are produced as a consequence of
this choice. The result of the evaluation of a goal G in the program P is therefore a
set of computed answers, where each of these answers is the substitution obtained by
the composition of all the m.g.u. s which are encountered in a speciﬁc computation
(with speciﬁc choices of clauses), restricted to the variables present in G. For a more
precise deﬁnition of this idea, as well as of the whole process of evaluating a goal,
see the box on Sect. 6.4.

12.4 The Computational Model

393

Turning to our previous example, the only computed answer for the goal p(Y)
in program Pa is the substitution {Y /a} while, for the same program, the goal p(b)
has no computed answer given that all its computations either terminate with failure
(when the second clause is used) or do not terminate (when the ﬁrst clause is used).

Backtracking in PROLOG

When moving from the theoretical model to an implemented language, such as
Prolog, non-determinism must, at some level, be transformed into determinism,
given that the physical computing machine is deterministic. This can obviously be
done in various ways, and in principle does not cause loss of solutions. For example,
we could think of starting k parallel computations when there are k possible clauses
for a predicate19 and therefore consider the results of all the possible computations.
In Prolog, however, for reasons of simplicity and implementation efﬁciency, the
strategy we ﬁrst saw is employed: clauses are used according to the textual order in
which they occur in the program (top-to-bottom). We saw in the previous example that
this strategy is incomplete, given that it does allow us to ﬁnd all possible computed
answers. This limit, however, is adjustable by the programmer who, knowing this
property of Prolog, can order the clauses in the program in the most convenient way
(typically putting ﬁrst those relating to terminal cases and then the inductive steps).
Note, though, that this trick, at least in principle, eliminates some of the declarative
nature of the language, because the programmer has speciﬁed an aspect of control.
In addition to inﬁnite computations, there is a second, more important aspect to
be considered by adopting the deterministic model of Prolog and deals with the
handing of failures. Let us ﬁrst see an example. Let us consider the program Pb:

2

1

p ( X ): - X = f ( a ).
p ( X ): - X = g ( a ).
Let us consider the evaluation of the goal p(g(Y)). By the Prolog strategy,
clause (1) is chosen, which, using the substitution {X/g(Y )}, produces the new goal
g(Y) = f(a). This fails, given that the two terms in the equation cannot be uni-
ﬁed. However, given that there is still one clause to use, it would not be acceptable
to terminate the computation by returning a failure. “Backtracking” then occurs,
returning to the choice of the clause for p(g(Y)) and therefore continues the com-
putation by trying clause (2). In this way, the computation achieves success with the
computed answer {Y /a}.

In general, therefore, when arriving at a failure, the Prolog abstract machine
“backtracks” to a previous choice point at which there are other choices; that is, where
there are other clauses to test. In this backtracking process, the bindings that might
have been computed in the previous computation must be undone. Once a choice
point has been reached, a new clause is tried and the computation continues in the way
we have seen. If the previous choice point contains no possibilities for computations,

19 Clearly, on a machine with one processor, the k parallel computations must be appropriately
“scheduled” so they can be executed in a sequential manner, analogous to what happens with
processes in a multitasking operating system.

394

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

an older choice point is sought and, if there are no more, the computation terminates
in failure. Note that all of this is handled directly by the Prolog abstract machine
and is completely invisible to the programmer (except the use of particular constructs
such as the cut which we will introduce in Sect. 12.5.1).

It is also easy to see how this procedure, which uses a search corresponding to
a depth-ﬁrst search through a tree representing the possible computations, can be
computationally demanding. The solution to the problem seen in Sect. 12.1.1, for
example, requires extensive backtracking and is fairly wasteful in computation time.

Let us now see another example. Consider the program Pc:

p ( X ): - X = f ( Y ) , q ( X ).
p ( X ): - X = g ( Y ) , q ( X ).
q ( X ): - X = g ( a ).
q ( X ): - X = g ( b ).

1

2

3

4

Let us analyse the goal p(Z). Using clause (1), we obtain the goal Z=f(Y),q(Z).
The evaluation of the equation produces the m.g.u. {Z / f (Y )} and we obtain the
goal q(f(Y)). Using clause (3), we obtain the goal f(Y) = g(a), which fails.
At this point we must turn to the last choice point, that is to the point where the
choice of clause for the predicate q occurred. In this case, there are no bindings
to undo, and therefore we try clause (4), obtaining therefore the goal f(Y)=g(b)
which also fails. We return again to the choice point for q and we see that there are
no other possible clauses and therefore we return to the previous choice point (the
one for predicate p). Doing this, we have to undo the binding {Z / f (Y )} calculated
by clause (1) and therefore we return to the initial situation, where variable Z is
not instantiated. Using clause (2), we obtain the goal Z=g(Y),q(Z) and therefore
by the evaluation of the equation, we obtain the m.g.u. {Y /a} and the new goal
q(g(Y)). At this point, using clause (3), we obtain the goal g(Y)=g(a) which
succeeds and produces the m.g.u. {Y /a}. Given that there remain no more goals to
evaluate, the computation terminates with success. The result of the computation
is produced by composing the computed m.g.u. s {Z /g(Y )}{Y /a} and restricting
the substitution {Z /g(a), Y (a)} obtained by this composition to the single variable
present in the initial goal. Therefore, the computed answer obtained is {Z /g(a)}.
Note that there is another computed answer, {Z /g(b)}, which we can obtain using
clause (4) rather than (3). In Prolog implementations, answers subsequent to the
ﬁrst can be obtained using the “;” command. Finally, the reader can easily check that
the goal p(g(c)) in program Pc terminates with failure, a result that is obtained
after having proved all four of the possible clause combinations.

12.4.5 Some Examples

In this subsection, we will focus on the Prolog language, and we will make
use of its syntax. The notation [h|t] is used to denote the list which has h
as its head and t as its tail. Let us remember that the head is the ﬁrst element
in the list, while the tail is what remains of the list when the head has been
removed. The empty list is written [], while [a,b,c] is an abbreviation for

12.4 The Computational Model

395

[a | [b | [c |[] ]]] (the list composed of elements a, b and c). Note that
in Prolog, as in pure logic programming language, there exists no list type, for
which the binary function symbol [|] can be used for terms that are not lists. For
example, we can also write [a | f(a)] which is not a list (because f(a) is not
a list).

As the ﬁrst example, let us consider the following program member which checks

whether an element belongs to a given list:

m e m b e r ( X , [ X | Xs ]).
m e m b e r ( X , [ Y | Xs ]) : - m e m b e r ( X , Xs ).

The declarative reading of the program is immediate: Clause (1) consists of the
terminal case in which the element that we are looking for (the ﬁrst argument of
the member predicate) is the head of the list (the second argument to the member
predicate). Clause (2) instead provides the inductive case and tells us that X is an
element of the list [Y|Xs] if it is an element of the list Xs.

Formulated in this way, the member program is similar to the one that we could
write in any language that supports recursion. However, let us note that, unlike in
the imperative and functional paradigms, this program can be used in two different
ways.

The more conventional mode is the one in which it is used as a test. In a Prolog

system, once the previous program has been input, we have:

? - m e m b e r ( hewey , [ dewey , hewey , l o u i e ]).
Yes

where ?- is the abstract machine’s prompt, to which we have added the goal whose
evaluation we require. The next line contains the interpreter’s answer. In this case,
we have a simple “boolean” answer which expresses the existence of a successful
computation of our goal. Moreover, as we know, we can also use the program to
compute. For example, we can ask for the evaluation of:

? - m e m b e r ( X , [ dewey , hewey , l o u i e ]).
X = d e w e y

The abstract machine returns {X/dewey} as the computed answer. We can also
obtain more answers using the “;” command. When there are no more answer, the
system replies “no”.

Finally, even if it is used in a rather unnatural fashion, we can use the ﬁrst argument

to instantiate the list that appears as the second argument. For example:

? - m e m b e r ( dewey , [ X , hewey , l o u i e ]).
X = d e w e y

This possibility of using the same arguments as inputs or as outputs according to the
way in which they are instantiated is unique to the logic paradigm and is due to the
presence of uniﬁcation in the computational model.

We can clarify this point further by considering the following append program

which allows us to concatenate lists:

a p p e n d ([] , Ys , Ys ).
a p p e n d ([ X | Xs ] , Ys , [ X | Zs ]) : - a p p e n d ( Xs , Ys , Zs ).

1

2

396

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

In this case, too, the declarative reading is immediate. If the ﬁrst list is empty, the
results is the second list (clause(1)). Otherwise, (inductively), if Zs is the result of
the concatenation of Xs and Ys, the result of the concatenation of [X|Xs] and Ys
is obtained by adding X to the head of the list Zs, as indicated by [X|Zs].
The normal use of the this program is illustrated by the following goal:

? - a p p e n d ([ dewey , h e w e y ] , [ louie , d o n a l d ] , Zs ).
Zs = [ dewey , hewey , louie , d o n a l d ]

Moreover, we can use append also to know how to subdivide a list into sublists,

something that is not possible in a functional or imperative program:

? - a p p e n d ( Xs , Ys , [ dewey , h e w e y ]).
Xs = []
Ys = [ dewey , h e w e y ];
Xs = [ d e w e y ]
Ys = [ h e w e y ];
Xs = [ dewey , h e w e y ]
Ys = [];
no

Here, as before, the “;” command causes the computation of new solutions.

As a third example, we give the deﬁnition of the sublist predicate (we used
this in Sect. 12.1.1). If Xs is a sublist of Ys, then there exist another two (possibly
empty) lists As and Bs such that Ys is the concatenation of As, Xs and Bs. We note
that this means that Xs is the sufﬁx of a preﬁx of Ys. Hence using append, we can
deﬁne sublist as follows:

s u b l i s t ( Xs , Ys ) : - a p p e n d ( As , XsBs , Ys ) , append ( Xs , Bs , XsBs ).

This program, combined with the append program and the sequence program
of Sect. 12.1.1 allow us to solve the problem stated in Sect. 12.1.1. Note the concise-
ness and simplicity of the resulting program. Clearly other deﬁnitions of sublist
are possible (see Exercise 8).

As a last example, let us consider a program that solves the classical problem
of the Towers of Hanoi. We have a tower (in Computer Science terms, we would
say a stack) composed of n perforated discs (of different diameters), arranged on a
pole in order of decreasing diameter and we have 2 free poles. The problem consists
of moving the tower to another pole, recreating the initial order of the discs. The
following rules apply. The disks can be moved only from one pole to another. Only
one disc at a time can be moved from one pole to another and the top disc must be
taken from a pole. A disc cannot be put onto a smaller disc.

According to legend, this problem was assigned by the Divinity to the monks of a
monastery near to Hanoi. There were three poles and 64 discs of gold. The solution
to the problem would have signalled the end of the world. Given that the optimal
solution requires time exponential in the number of discs, even if the legend comes
true, we can still remain calm for a while: 264 is a large enough number.

The following program solves the problem for an arbitrary number of disc, N, and
three poles called A, B and C. It uses the coding of the natural numbers in terms of
0 and successor that we saw above.

12.5 Extensions

397

hanoi ( s (0) , A , B , C [ move (A , B )]).

h a n o i ( s ( N ) , A , B , C , M o v e s ): -
h a n o i ( N , A , C , B , M o v e s 1 ) ,
h a n o i ( N , C , B , A , M o v e s 2 ) ,
a p p e n d ( Moves1 , [ move ( A , B )| M o v e s 2 ] , M o v e s ).

The call hanoi(n, A, B, C, Move), where n is a (term which represents a)
natural number, solves the problem of moving the tower of n discs from A to B using
C as an auxiliary pole. The solution is contained in the Move variable which, when the
computation terminates, is instantiated with the list containing move which contribute
to the solution. Every move is represented by a term of the form move(X,Y) to
indicate the move of the top disc of pole X to pole Y.

This amazingly simple program demonstrates the power of logic programming
and recursive reasoning. Let us give its declarative interpretation. The ﬁrst clause is
clear: if we have just one disc, all we have to do is to move it from A from B. The
reading of the second clause also is quite intuitive. If Moves1 is the list of moves
that solves the problem of moving a tower of N discs from A to C using B as an
auxiliary pole and Moves2 is the list of moves needed to move the tower of N disc
from C to B using A as an auxiliary pole, to solve our problem in the case of N+1 (or
s(N)) discs, we have to do the following: ﬁrst, execute all the moves in Moves1,
then move from A to B (with the move move(A,B)) the N+1st disc in A which,
being the largest, must be the last (at the bottom) in B as well. Finally, execute all the
moves in Moves2. This is what is done by the append predicate which therefore
will use the variable Moves to provide the solutions to this problem.

12.5 Extensions

Until now, we have seen pure logic programming and some, highly partial, aspects of
Prolog. In this last section, we will brieﬂy outline some of the numerous extensions
to the pure formalism which are used in real implemented logic languages. We
defer to the next chapter an important extension of logic programming which is
nowadays used in most Prolog languages, namely constraint logic programming.
In the bibliographical notes we have included some references for those wishing to
learn more.

12.5.1 Prolog

Prolog is a language that is much richer than it might appear from what has been
said so far. Let us recall that this language differs from logic programming in its
adoption of precise rules for selecting the next atom to be rewritten (left to right) and
for selecting the next clause to use (top to bottom, according to the program text).

398

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

In addition to these, there are other important differences with the theoretical

formalism. We will list some of these without pretending to be exhaustive.

Arithmetic

A real language cannot allow itself the luxury of using a completely symbolic arith-
metic with no predeﬁned operators. In Prolog, there exist therefore integers and
reals (as ﬂoating point) as predeﬁned data structures and various operators for manip-
ulating them. These include:

• The usual arithmetic operators +, −, ∗ and // (integer division).
• Arithmetic comparison operators such as <, <= >=, =:= (equal), = \ =

(different).

• An evaluation operator called is.

Unlike other (function and predicate) symbols used in Prolog, these symbols
use inﬁx notation for ease of use. There are however numerous delicate aspects that
should be known to avoid simple mistakes.

First, comparison operators always require that their operands are ground arith-

metic expressions (they cannot contain variables). Thus, while we have20:

? - 3*2 =:= 1+5
Yes
? 4 > 5+2
no

if we use terms that are not arithmetic expressions or which contain variables, error
will be signalled, as in:

? - 3 > a
e r r o r in a r i t h m e t i c e x p r e s s i o n : a is not a n u m b e r
? - X =:= 3+5
i n s t a n t i a t i o n f a u l t .

The last example is particularly disturbing. The evaluation of the arithmetic
expression 3+5 produces the value 8 which we might expect to be bound to the
variable X. This cannot be done using =:=, nor can it be done using syntactical
equality between terms as considered in the previous paragraph. If we write X =
3+5, indeed, the effect is that of binding X to the term 3+5 (rather than the value
8). To avoid this problem, the expression evaluation operator is is introduced. This
operator allows us to obtain the effect we desire; s is t indeed uniﬁes s with
the value of the ground arithmetic expression t (if t is not a ground arithmetic
expression, we have an error). The following are some examples of the use of is:

20 At the prompt ?- we ﬁnd the query that we want to evaluate; the following line is the Prolog
interpreter’s reply.

12.5 Extensions

399

? - X is 3+5;
X = 8
? - 8 is 3 + 5
Yes
? - 6 is 3 * 3
no
? - X is Y *2
e r r o r in a r i t h m e t i c e x p r e s s i o n : Y *2 is not a n u m b e r

The use of is, necessary to be able to evaluate an expression, makes the use of
arithmetic in Prolog rather complicated. For example, given the following program:

e v a l u a t e (0 ,0).
e v a l u a t e ( s ( X ) , Val +1) : - e v a l u a t e (X , Val )

The goal evaluate(s(s(s(0))), X) does not compute the value 3 for X, as
perhaps would have been expected, but the term 0+1+1+1 (see Exercise 9 at the
end of this chapter, too).

Cut

Prolog provides various constructs for interaction with the abstract machine’s inter-
preter so that the normal ﬂow of control can be modiﬁed. Among these, one of the
more important (and most discussed) is cut. This is an argument-free predicate,
written as an exclamation mark, which allows the programmer to eliminate some
of the possible alternatives produced during evaluation, with the aim of increasing
execution efﬁciency. It is used when we are sure that, when a condition is satisﬁed,
the other clauses in the program are no longer useful. For example, the following
program computes the minimum of two value. If a comparison condition is true, the
other is necessarily false, so we can use ! to express the fact that once the ﬁrst clause
has been used, there is no need to consider the second.

m i n i m u m ( X , Y , X ) : - X < Y , !.
m i n i m u m ( X , Y , Y ) : - X > Y .

Alternatively, if we are interested only in testing whether a value appears at least

once in a list, we can use the following modiﬁcation to the member program:

m e m b e r ( X , [ X | Xs ]) : - !.
m e m b e r ( X , [ Y | Xs ]) : - m e m b e r ( X , Xs ).

In general, the meaning of cut is the following. Suppose that we have n clauses
deﬁnining the predicate p

p ( S1 ) : - A1 .
...
p ( Sk ) : - B , ! , C .
...
p ( Sn ) : - An .

If, during the evaluation of the goal p(t), we ﬁnd the kth clause in the list being
used, we have the following cases:

400

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

1. If an evaluation of B fails,21 then we proceed by trying the k + 1st clause.
2. If, instead, the evaluation of B succeeds, then ! is evaluated. It succeeds (it
always does) and the evaluation proceeds with C. In the case of backtracking,
however, all the alternative ways of computing B are eliminated, as well as are
eliminated all the alternatives provided by the clauses from the kth to the nth to
compute p(t).

There is no need to say that cut, in addition to not being easy to use, eliminates a

good part of the declarativeness of a program.

Disjunction

If we want to express the disjunction of two goals, G1 and G2, that is the fact that it
is sufﬁcient that at least one of the two succeeds, we can use two clauses of the form:

p ( X ) : - G1 .
p ( X ) : - G2 .

with the goal p(X). The same effect can be obtained writing G1;G2, where we have
used the predeﬁned predicate “;”, which represents disjunction.

If-then-else

The traditional construct from imperative languages:

If B then C1 else C2
is provided in Prolog as a built-in with syntax B -> C1;C2. This construct is
implemented using cut as follows:

i f _ t h e n _ e l s e (B , C1 , C2 ) : - B , ! , C1 .
i f _ t h e n _ e l s e (B , C1 , C2 ) : - C2 .

Negation

Thus far, we have seen that in the body of a clause, only “positive” atomic formulæ
can be used; in other words, they cannot be negated.22 Often, however, it can also
be useful to use negated atomic formulæ. For example, let us consider the following
program, flights:

d i r e c t _ f l i g h t ( bologna , paris ).
d i r e c t _ f l i g h t ( bologna , a m s t e r d a m ).
d i r e c t _ f l i g h t ( paris , b o m b a y ).

2

21 Here, B, just like Ai and C, is considered as an arbitrary goal and not necessarily an atomic one.
22 Here, we refer to the H : −A1, . . . , An notation. If, instead, we consider a clause as a disjunction
of literals, the atoms in the body are negated, given that the preceding representation is equivalent
to ¬A1 ∨ · · · ∨ ¬An ∨ H .

12.5 Extensions

d i r e c t _ f l i g h t ( a m s t e r d a m , m o s c o w ).
f l i g h t ( X , Y ): - d i r e c t _ f l i g h t ( X , Y ).
f l i g h t ( X , Y ): - d i r e c t _ f l i g h t ( X , Z ) , f l i g h t (Z , Y ).

401

4

6

Here, we have a series of facts deﬁning the direct_flight predicate, which
denotes the existence of a connection without stopover between two destinations.
Then, we have the flight predicate which deﬁnes a ﬂight, possibly with interme-
diate stops, between two locations. This will be a direct ﬂight (clause 5) or rather a
direct ﬂight for a stopover different from the one that is the destination, followed by
a ﬂight from this stopover to the destination (clause 6). With this program, we can
check the existence of a ﬂight, or we can ask which destinations can be reached from
a given airport:

? - f l i g h t ( bologna , b o m b a y )
Yes
? - d i r e c t _ f l i g h t ( bologna , m o s c o w )
no
? - f l i g h t ( bologna , X )
X = p a r i s

However, we fail to express the fact that there exists only non-direct ﬂights. Indeed,
there is no way we can express that there does not exist a direct ﬂight. To do this, we
need negation. If we write:

i n d i r e c t _ f l i g h t (X , Y ) : - f l i g h t (X , Y ) , not d i r e c t _ f l i g h t ( X , Y ).

we mean to say that there exists an indirect ﬂight between X and Y if there exists
a ﬂight (between X and Y) and there exist no direct ﬂight. With this deﬁnition, we
have:

? - i n d i r e c t _ f l i g h t ( bologna , b o m b a y )
Yes
? - i n d i r e c t _ f l i g h t ( bologna , paris )
no

These results can be explained as follows. The Prolog interpreter evaluates a
goal such as not G by trying to evaluate the un-negated goal G. If the evaluation
of this goal terminates (possibly after backtracking) with failure, then the goal not
G succeeds. If, on the other hand, the goal G has a computation that terminates with
success, then that of not G fails. Finally, if the evaluation of G does not terminate,
then not G fails to terminate. This type of negation is called “negation as failure”,23
in that it interprets the negation of a goal in terms of failure of the un-negated goal.
Note that, because of inﬁnite computations,24 this type of negation differs from the
negation in classical logic, given that the lack of success of G is not equivalent to the
success of the negated version not G. For example, neither the goal p nor the goal
not p succeed in the program p :- p.

23 To be more precise, negation as failure, as deﬁned in the theoretical model of logic programming,
has a behaviour that is slightly different from that described because of the incompleteness of the
Prolog interpreter.
24 And also non-ground goals, which we will not consider here.

402

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

12.5.2 Logic Programming and Databases

The flight program above indirectly indicates a possible application of logic
programming in the context of databases.

A set of unit clauses, such as those deﬁning the direct_flight predicate, is
indeed, to all effects, the explicit (or extensional) deﬁnition of the relation denoted
by this predicate. In this sense, this set of unit clauses can be seen as the ana-
logue of a relation in the relational database model. To express a query, while in
the relational model we would use relational algebra with the usual operations of
selection, projection, join, etc., or more conveniently, a data manipulation language
such as SQL, in the logic paradigm we can use its usual computational mechanisms.
For example, to ﬁnd out if there is a direct ﬂight to Paris, we can use the query
direct_flight(X,paris). The predicates deﬁned by the non-unit clauses
such as flight, deﬁne relations in an implicit (or intensional) manner. They, indeed,
allow us to compute new relations which are not explicitly stored, through the mech-
anism of inference. Using database terminology, we will say that these predicates
deﬁne “views” (or virtual relations).

Note, moreover, that in the flights program, function symbols are not used.
Indeed, if we want only to manipulate relations, as is the case in relational algebra,
function symbols are not needed.

These considerations were crystallised in the deﬁnition of Datalog, a logic lan-
guage for databases. In its simplest form, it is a simpliﬁed version of logic program-
ming in which:

1. There are no function symbols.
2. Extensional and intensional predicates are distinguished, as are comparison pred-

icates.

3. Extensional predicates cannot occur in the head of clauses with a non-empty body.
4. If a variable occurs in the head, it must occur in the body of a clause.
5. A comparison predicate can occur only in the body of a clause. The variables
occurring in such a predicate must occur also in another atom in the body of the
same clause.

The last two conditions deal with the speciﬁc evaluation rule which Datalog uses25
and will here will be ignored. The distinction between extensional and intensional
predicates corresponds to the intuitive idea that has already been discussed. Exten-
sional predicates, as condition (3) implies, can be deﬁned only by facts.

The flights program can therefore be considered as a Datalog program.
The reader who knows SQL or relational algebra will have no difﬁculty in under-
standing how the presence of recursion increases the expressive power of Datalog
beyond that of these other formalisms. Our program, flights, provides us with

25 Datalog adopts a kind of bottom-up evaluation mechanism for goals. This differs from the top-
down one we saw for logic programming. The results obtained are, however, the same.

12.6 Advantages and Disadvantages of the Logic Paradigm

403

an example in this sense: the query flight(bologna, X) allows us to ﬁnd all
the destinations that can be reached from Bologna with an arbitrary number of inter-
mediate stops. This query is not expressible in relational algebra or in SQL (at least,
in its initial version) since the number of joins that we must create depends on the
number of intermediate stops and, in general, not knowing how many of them there
are (we are making no assumptions about how relations are structured), we cannot
deﬁne such a number a priori.

12.6 Advantages and Disadvantages of the Logic Paradigm

The few examples given in this chapter should be sufﬁcient to show that logic
languages require a programming style that is signiﬁcantly different from that of
traditional languages. They also have a different expressive power. Clearly, since
both Prolog and the conventional programming languages are Turing-complete for-
malisms, we are not saying that logic languages allow “to computate more things”
than common imperative languages. The expressive power to which we refer is of a
pragmatic kind, as we will make clearer in this section.

First, it is worth repeating that logic languages, in a way analogous to functional
languages, allow us express solutions even to very complex problems in a “purely
declarative” way, and therefore in a simple and compact way. In our speciﬁc case,
these aspects are further reinforced by three unique properties of the logic paradigm:
(i) the ability to use a program in more than one way by transforming input arguments
into outputs and viceversa; (ii) the possibility of obtaining a complex relationship
between variables as a result, which implicitly expresses an inﬁnite number of solu-
tions (given by all the values of the variables that satisfy the relation); (iii) the
possibility of reading a program directly as a logical formula.

The ﬁrst characteristic derives from the fact that the basic computational mech-
anism, uniﬁcation, is intrinsically bi-directional. This does not happen either with
assignment in imperative languages, or with pattern matching in functional languages
because both of these mechanisms presuppose a direction in variable bindings. This
ﬂexibility clearly allows us to use every program to its best, avoiding the duplication
of code for modiﬁcations that are often only of a syntactic nature.

The second property is particularly important to all application areas in which a
single solution, understood as a set of speciﬁc values of interesting variables, either
cannot be obtained (because the data do not contain enough information), or is not
interesting, or is particularly difﬁcult to obtain computationally. This property will
be more evident in the next chapter, when will discuss constraint logic programs .

The third aspect, ﬁnally, at least in principle, makes it easier to verify the cor-
rectness of logic programs than imperative ones, where a logical reading of pro-
grams is possible but requires much more expressive (and complicated) tools. As
already emphasised in Sect. 11.4, this aspect is essential to be able to obtain formal
correctness-verifying tools that are easily usable on programs of signiﬁcant size.

404

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

These three aspects, which we can summarise in the principle of “computation
as deduction”, allow us to express in a natural fashion forms of reasoning that we
encounter in artiﬁcial intelligence and knowledge representation (for example, in
the context of the Semantic Web). The fact that control is handled entirely by the
abstract machine through backtracking, allows to easily express search problems in
a space of solutions.

Logic languages can also proﬁtably be used as tools for the rapid prototyping of
systems. Using Prolog, it is possible to describe in a very short period and in a
compact way, even very complex systems, with the advantage, as far as speciﬁcation
languages are concerned, that it can be executed.

Thus far, advantages. Beside them, however, we can record various negative

aspects of logic languages, at least in their classical versions.

First, as already noted in this chapter, the control mechanism based on backtrack-
ing is of limited efﬁciency. Various expedients can be used to improve this aspect,
be it at the level of constructs used in programs, or at the implementation level. For
example, abstract machines speciﬁc to logic languages such as the WAM (Warren
Abstract Machine) have been deﬁned and have been variously optimised. However,
the efﬁciency of a Prolog program remains fairly limited.

The absence of types or modules is a second bad point, even if in this sense
some more recent languages have proposed partial solutions (for example, the logic
language, Mercury). From what was said in Chap. 8, it should be clear that the lack
of an adequate type system makes program correctness checking relatively difﬁcult,
despite the possibility of declarative reading.

Also, the arithmetic constructs and, in general, built-ins in Prolog certainly do
not facilitate the correctness of programs. This is because their use is not easy due
to various semantic subtleties. This is particularly evident in the control constructs,
which frequently force us to choose between a clear program that is not efﬁcient and
an efﬁcient one that is, however, hard to understand.

Finally, and for many reasons (not just a limited commercial interest), logic lan-
guages almost always have a programming environment that is rather deﬁcient, where
there are few of the characteristics available in the sophisticated environments for
object-oriented programming.

12.7 Summary

In this chapter, we have presented the primary characteristics of the logic program-
ming paradigm, a relatively recent paradigm (which has developed since the mid-
1970s), which implements the old aspiration of seeing computation as a process that
is entirely governed by logical laws. With only one chapter available to us, we have
had to limit ourselves to introductory aspects, however what has been presented has
enough formal precision to illustrate the computational model for logic programming
languages. In particular, we have seen:

12.8 Bibliographical Notes

405

• Some syntactic concepts in ﬁrst-order logic which are necessary for the deﬁnition

of clauses and therefore logic programs.

• The process of uniﬁcation which comprises the basic computational mechanism.
This required a few concepts relating to terms and substitutions. We have also seen
a speciﬁc algorithm for uniﬁcation.

• How computation in a logic language works using a rule of deduction called
SLD Resolution. In the text, we have chosen an approach that was inspired by a
procedural reading of the clauses that demonstrate the similarity with “normal”
procedures in imperative languages. Two boxes more formally introduced the
concepts.

After some examples, we saw some important extensions to the pure formalism,

in particular:

• Some speciﬁc characteristics of the Prolog language. We did not cover meta-
programming, higher-order programming or constructs that manipulate the pro-
gram at runtime, all of which are very important.

• The idea of the use of logic languages in connection with databases.

For more information on those aspects of Prolog that we have omitted or for
a better introduction to Datalog, the reader is recommended to the literature listed
below. On the other hand Constraint logic programs, an important extension, will be
considered in the next chapter.

12.8 Bibliographical Notes

Herbrand’s ideas on uniﬁcation are in his doctoral dissertation from 1930 [2]. The
deﬁnition of the resolution rule and the ﬁrst formalisation of the uniﬁcation algorithm
are in A. Robinson’s work [3]. The uniﬁcation algorithm that we have presented was
introduced in [4]. Major details of theory of uniﬁcation can be obtained from various
articles and texts, among which is [5].

The “historic” paper by R. Kowalski which introduced SLD Resolution and there-
fore the theory of logic programming is [6]. K. L. Clark’s results on correctness and
completion are in [7].

There are many texts both on the theory of logic programming and on program-
ming in Prolog. Among the former, there is the text by Lloyd [8] and the more recent
and detailed treatment by Apt [1]. For programming in Prolog and for numerous
(non-trivial) examples of programming, we advise the reader to consult the classic
text by Sterling and Shapiro [9], from which we have taken the program that solves
the problem of the Towers of Hanoi; there is also the book by Coelho and Cotta [10],
from which we have taken the program in the example presented in Sect. 12.1.1.

Finally, as for Datalog and, more generally, the use of logic programs with

databases, [11] can be consulted.

406

12.9 Exercises

12 Logic Programming Paradigm

1. State a context-free grammar which deﬁnes propositional formulæ (that is those
obtained by considering only predicates of arity 0 and without quantiﬁers).
2. Assume that we have to represent the natural numbers using 0 for zero and s(n)
for the successor of n. State what is the computed answer obtained by evaluating
the goal p(s,t,X), in the following logic program, where s and t are terms
that represent natural numbers:

p (0 , X , X ).
p ( s ( Y ) , X , s ( Z )): - p ( Y , X , Z ).

3. State what are the computed answers obtained by evaluating the goal p(X) in

the following logic program:

p (0).
p ( s ( X )): - q ( X ).
q ( s ( X ): - p ( X ).

4. Given the following logic program:

m e m b e r ( X , [ X | Xs ]).
m e m b e r ( X , [ Y | Xs ]): - m e m b e r ( X , Xs ).

State what is the result of evaluating the goal:

m e m b e r ( f ( X ) , [1 , f (2) , 3] ).

5. Given the following Prolog program (recall that X and Y are variables, while

a and b are constants):

p ( b ): - p ( b ).
p ( X ): - r ( b ).
p ( a ): - p ( a ).
r ( Y ).

State whether the goal p(a) terminates or not; justify your answer.

6. Consider the following logic program:

p ( X ): - q ( a ) , r ( Y ).
q ( b ).
q ( X ): - p ( X ).
r ( b ).

State whether the goal p(b) terminates or not; justify your answer.

7. Assuming that the natural numbers are represented using 0 for zero and s(n)
for the successor of n and using a primitive write(x) that writes the term t,
write a logic program that prints all the natural numbers.

8. Deﬁne the sublist predicate in a direct fashion without using append.
9. Write in Prolog a program that computes the length (understood as the number
of elements) of a list and returns this value in numeric form. (Hint: consider an
inductive deﬁnition of length and use the is operator to increment the value in
the inductive case.)

References

407

10. List the principle differences between a logic program and a Prolog program.
11. If in a logic program, the order of the atoms in the body of a clause is changed,

is the semantics of the program altered? Justify your answer.

12. If in Prolog, the clause-selection rule were changed (for example, always
selecting the lowest instead of the highest) would it change the semantics of
the language? Justify your answer.

13. Give an example of a logic program, P, and of a goal, G, such that the evaluation
of G in P produces a different effect when two different selection rules are used.
(Suggestion: since for computed answers there is no difference in the use of
different selection rules, consider what happens to computations that do not
terminate and that fail.)

14. Informally describe a selection rule that allows us to obtain the least possible
number of computations that do not terminate. (Suggestion: computations that
do not terminate, by changing the selection rule, would become ﬁnite failures.
Consider a rule that guarantees that all atoms in the goal are evaluated.)

References

1. K.R. Apt, From Logic Programming to Prolog (Prentice Hall, 1997)
2. J. Herbrand, Logical Writings (Reidel, Dordrecht, 1971)
3. J.A. Robinson, A machine-oriented logic based on the resolution principle. J. ACM 12(1),

23–41 (1965)

4. A. Martelli, U. Montanari, An efﬁcient uniﬁcation algorithm. ACM Trans. Program. Lang.

Syst. 4, 258–282 (1982)

5. E. Eder, Properties of substitutions and uniﬁcations. J. Symb. Comput. 1, 31–46 (1985)
6. R.A. Kowalski, Predicate logic as a programming language. Inf. Process. 74, 569–574 (1974)
7. K.L. Clark, Predicate logic as a computational formalism. Technical Report Res. Rep. DOC

79/59, Imperial College (Department of Computing, London, 1979)

8. J.W. Lloyd, Foundations of Logic Programming, 2nd edn. (Springer, 1987)
9. L. Sterling, E. Shapiro, The Art of Prolog (MIT Press, 1986)
10. H. Coelho, J.C. Cotta, Prolog by Example (Springer, 1988)
11. S. Ceri, G. Gottlob, L. Tanca, Logic Programming and Databases (Springer, 1989)
