# Fuente
- archivo: 045-082.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/(Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science) Maurizio Gabbrielli_ Simone Martini - Programming Languages_ Principles and Paradigms (2nd Edition)-Springer (2023)/045-082.pdf
- extraido: 2026-03-26T16:14:15

# Contenido

Describing a Programming Language

2

A programming language is an artiﬁcial formalism in which algorithms can be
expressed. For all its artiﬁciality, though, this formalism remains a language. Its
study can make good use of the many concepts and tools developed in the last cen-
tury in linguistics (which studies both natural and artiﬁcial languages). Without going
into great detail, this chapter poses the problem of what it means to “give” (deﬁne)
a programming language and which tools can be used in this undertaking.

2.1 Levels of Description

In a study that has now become a classic in linguistics, Morris [1] studied the various
levels at which a description of a language can occur. He identiﬁed three major areas:
grammar, semantics and pragmatics.

Grammar is that part of the description of the language which answers the ques-
tion: which phrases are correct? Once the alphabet of a language has been deﬁned
as a ﬁrst step (in the case of natural language, for example, the Latin alphabet of
22 or 26 letters, the Cyrillic alphabet, etc.), the lexical component, which uses this
alphabet, identiﬁes the sequence of symbols constituting the words (or tokens) of the
language deﬁned. When alphabet and words have been deﬁned, the syntax describes
which sequences of words constitute legal phrases. Syntax is therefore a relation
between signs. Between all possible sequences of words (over a given alphabet), the
syntax chooses a subset of sequences to form phrases of the language proper.1

1 In linguistics, obviously, things are more complicated. In addition to the lexical and the syntactic
levels, there is also a morphological level which is distinct from the two previous ones. At the
morphological level, the different forms assumed by words (or phrases) as a function of their

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
M. Gabbrielli and S. Martini, Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms,
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34144-1_2

25

26

2 Describing a Programming Language

Semantics is that part of the description of the language which seeks to answer
the question “what does a correct phrase mean?” Semantics, therefore, attributes a
signiﬁcance to every correct phrase. In the case of natural languages, the process
of attribution of meaning can be very complex; in the case of artiﬁcial languages
the situation is simpler. It is not difﬁcult to assume, in this case, that semantics
is a relation between signs (correct sentences) and meanings (autonomous entities
existing independently of the signs that are used to describe them). For example, the
meaning of a certain program could be the mathematical function computed by that
program. Or, it could the trace of the changes the program induces on the state of
an abstract machine. The semantic description of that language will be constructed
using techniques allowing us, when given a program, to ﬁx the function the program
computes; or to determine the changes on the abstract machine.

It is at the third level that the principal actor makes its appearance on the scene, the
person who uses a certain language. Pragmatics is that part of a language description
which asks itself “how do we use a meaningful sentence?” Sentences with the same
meaning can be used in different ways by different users. Different linguistic contexts
can require the use of different sentences; some are more elegant, some are antiquated,
or more dialect-based than others. Pragmatics is interested in the intersubjective,
social aspects of a language—understanding these aspects is no less important than
knowing the syntax and semantics.

In the case of programming languages, we can add a fourth level to the three
classical ones: the implementation level. Given that the languages that interest us
are procedural languages (that is, languages whose correct phrases specify actions),
it remains for us to describe “how to execute a correct sentence, in such a way that
we respect the semantics”. A knowledge of the semantics is, in general, enough for
the language user, but the software designer (and more importantly the language
designer) is also interested in the process with which operative phrases implement
the actions they specify. It is precisely this which is described by the language
implementation.

We can give a fairly rudimentary example which we hope will serve our purposes.
Let us consider the natural language used to express recipes in cooking. The syntax
determines the correct sentences with which a recipe is expressed. The semantics is
about explaining “what is” a recipe, independent of its (speciﬁc) execution. Pragmat-
ics studies how a cook (“that cook”) interprets the various sentences of the recipe. In
the end, the implementation describes the way (where, and with what ingredients)
the kitchen recipe transforms into the dish that the semantics prescribes.

In the next sections, we analyse the role performed by the four levels when they

are applied to programming languages.

grammatical function are deﬁned. For example in the lexicon (that is, the dictionary, the thesaurus
of the language in question), we ﬁnd the word “bear” with the associated lexical value given by the
image of the animal that everybody knows. At the morphological level, on the other hand, the word
is the convertible into the root “bear” and the morpheme “-s” which signals the plural. The natural
language’s phonetic aspects are also present but they are of no interest to us here.

2.2 Grammar and Syntax

27

2.2 Grammar and Syntax

We have already said that the grammar of a language ﬁrst establishes the alphabet
and lexicon. Then by means of a syntax, it deﬁnes those sequences of symbols corre-
sponding to well-formed phrases and sentences (or to “sentences” in short). Clearly,
at least from the viewpoint of natural language, the deﬁnition of the (ﬁnite) alphabet
is immediate. Even the lexicon can be deﬁned, at least to a ﬁrst approximation, in
a simple fashion. We will be content, for the time being, with a ﬁnite vocabulary;
we can simply list the words of interest to us. This is certainly what happens with
natural languages, given that dictionaries are ﬁnite volumes!2

How do we describe the syntax? In a natural language, it is the same natural lan-
guage which is used, in general, to describe its own syntax (classical examples are
grammar textbooks for various languages). Also a syntax for a programming lan-
guage is often described using natural language, particularly for the older languages.
Natural language, though, often introduces ambiguity in its syntactic description
and, in particular, it is of no use in the process of translating (compiling) a program
written in a high-level language into another (generally, at a lower level) language.
Linguistics, on the other hand, through the work in the 1950s of the American
linguist Noam Chomsky, has developed techniques to describe syntactic phenomena
in a formal manner. This description uses formalisms designed speciﬁcally to limit
the ambiguity that is always present in natural language. These techniques, known as
generative grammar, are not of much use in describing the syntax of natural languages
(which are too complex and highly sophisticated). Instead, they are a fundamental
tool for describing the syntax of programming languages (and are particularly useful
for their compilation, as we will brieﬂy see in Sect. 2.4).

Example 2.1 We will describe a simple language. It is the language of palindromic
strings, composed of the symbols a and b.3 Let us therefore begin by ﬁxing the
alphabet, A = {a, b}. We must now select, from all strings over A (that is ﬁnite
sequences of elements of A), the palindromic strings. The simplest way to do this is
to observe that there is a simple recursive deﬁnition of a palindromic string. Indeed,
we can say (this is the basis of the induction) that a and b are palindromic strings.
If, then, s is any string that we know already to be palindromic, then so are asa and
bsb (this is the induction step).

It is not difﬁcult to convince ourselves that this deﬁnition captures all and only
the palindromic strings of odd length over A. It remains to account for even-length
strings, such as abba. To include these as well, we add the fact that the empty string
(that is the string which contains no symbol from the alphabet) is also a palindromic
string to the base case of the inductive deﬁnition. Now our deﬁnition categorises all

2 In programming languages, the lexicon can also be formed from an inﬁnite set of words. We will
see below how this is possible.
3 A string is palindromic if it is identical to its mirror image. That is, the string is the same when
read from left to right or right to left. A famous example in Latin is, ignoring spaces, the riddle “in
girum imus nocte et consumimur igni”.

28

2 Describing a Programming Language

and only the palindromic strings over the alphabet A. If a string really is a palindromic
string, for example aabaa, or abba, there exists a sequence of applications of the
inductive rules just mentioned which will construct it. On the other hand, if a string
is not a palindromic string (for example aabab), there is no way to construct it
(cid:2)
inductively using the rules just introduced.

Context-free grammars, which we introduce in the next section, are a notation for
the concise and precise expression of recursive deﬁnitions of strings such as the one
we have just seen. The inductive deﬁnition of palindromic strings can be expressed
in grammatical form as:

P →
P → a
P → b
P → a Pa
P → b Pb
In these rules, P stands for “any palindromic string”, while the arrow → is read
as “can be”. The ﬁrst three lines will be immediately recognised as the basis of the
inductive deﬁnition, while the last two form the induction step.

2.2.1 Context-Free Grammars

The example just given is a context-free grammar, a fundamental tool for the descrip-
tion of programming languages. We begin by introducing a little notation and ter-
minology. Having ﬁxed a ﬁnite (or denumerable) set A, which we call the alphabet,
we denote by A∗ the set of all ﬁnite strings over A (that is ﬁnite-length sequences of
elements of A; the ∗ operator is called Kleene’s star). Let us immediately observe
that, according to the deﬁnition, the sequence of length zero also belongs to A∗—this
is the empty string, denoted by (cid:2).

A formal language over the alphabet A is a subset of A∗. A formal grammar
serves to identify a certain subset of strings from all those possible over a given
alphabet.4

Deﬁnition 2.1 (Context-Free Grammar) A context-free grammar is a quadruple
(NT , T, R, S) where:

1. NT is a ﬁnite set of symbols (non-terminal symbols, or variables, or syntactic

categories).

2. T is a ﬁnite set of symbols (terminal symbols).

4 In formal languages, a sequence of terminal symbols which appears in a language is usually called
a “word” of the language. We do not use this terminology; instead we speak of strings, to avoid
ambiguity with words and phrases of a language (natural or artiﬁcial), in the sense in which they
are normally understood.

2.2 Grammar and Syntax

29

3. R is a ﬁnite set of productions (or rules), each of which is composed of an

expression of the form:

V → w

where V (the head of the production) is a single non-terminal symbol and w (the
body) is a string composed of zero or more terminal or non-terminal symbols
(that is w is a string over T ∪ NT ).

4. S is an element of NT (the initial symbol).

According to this deﬁnition, therefore, the grammar in the example shown in
Example 2.1 is composed of the quadruple ({P}, {a, b}, R, P), where R is the set of
productions used in the example.

Let us observe that, according to the deﬁnition, a production can have an empty
body, that is, it can be composed of the null symbol, or, more properly, can be formed
from the empty string, (cid:2). We will see in a later section how a given grammar deﬁnes a
language over the alphabet formed from its terminal symbols. Let us begin however
with an example.

Example 2.2 Let us see a simple grammar that describes arithmetic expressions
(over the operators +, ∗, −, both unary and binary). The atomic elements of these
expressions are simple identiﬁers formed from ﬁnite sequences of the symbols a and
b.

We deﬁne the grammar G = ({E, I }, {a, b, +, ∗, −, (, )}, R, E), where R is the

following set of productions:

1. E → I
2. E → E + E
3. E → E ∗ E
4. E → E − E
5. E → −E
6. E → (E)

7. I → a
8. I → b
9. I → I a
10. I → I b

Unlike the grammar in Example 2.1, this one has more than one non-terminal sym-
bol corresponding, in an informal way, to an expression, E, or to an identiﬁer, I .
Note, once more, how the productions are a synthetic way to express recursive deﬁni-
tions. In this case, we are dealing with two deﬁnitions (which have been graphically
separated), of which the one for E uses in its base case the non-terminal symbol
(cid:2)
inductively deﬁned using the other recursive deﬁnition.

BNF

In the context of programming languages, context-free grammars were used for the
ﬁrst time in the deﬁnition of the language Algol 60. In the report that introduced

30

2 Describing a Programming Language

Algol 60, the grammar that deﬁnes the language is described using a notation that
is slightly different from the one we have just introduced. This notation, (consid-
ered, among other things, to be usable with a reduced character set, that does not
include arrow, italics, upper case, etc.) goes under the name of Backus Naur nor-
mal form (BNF), named after two authoritative members of the Algol committee
(John Backus who had previously directed the Fortran project—the ﬁrst high-level
language—and Peter Naur). In BNF:

• The arrow “→” is replaced by “::=”.
• The non-terminal symbols are written between angle brackets (for example (cid:5)Exp(cid:6)
and (cid:5)Ide(cid:6) could be the two non-terminal symbols of the grammar of Example 2.2).
• Productions with the same head are grouped into a single block using vertical bars
(“|”) to separate the productions. In Example 2.2, the productions for E could
therefore be expressed as follows:

(cid:5)E(cid:6) :: = (cid:5)I (cid:6) | (cid:5)E(cid:6) + (cid:5)E(cid:6) | (cid:5)E(cid:6) ∗ (cid:5)E(cid:6) | (cid:5)E(cid:6) − (cid:5)E(cid:6) | −(cid:5)E(cid:6) | ((cid:5)E(cid:6)).

Derivations and Languages

A grammar inductively deﬁnes a set of strings. We can make explicit the operative
aspect of this inductive deﬁnition using the concept of derivation.

Example 2.3 We can ensure that the string ab ∗ (a + b) is correct according to
the grammar of Example 2.2, reading the productions as “rewriting rules”, and by
repeatedly applying them. We use a bigger arrow (“⇒”) to denote the operation of
string rewriting. We can then proceed as follows. We start with the initial symbol, E,
and rewrite it using a production (which we are allowed to select). Let us, for example,
use production (3), obtaining the rewriting E ⇒ E ∗ E. Now we concentrate on the
right-hand side of this production. We have two E’s that can be rewritten (expanded)
independently of each other. Let us take the one on the left and apply production (1)
to obtain E ∗ E ⇒ I ∗ E. We can now choose whether we expand I or E (or the
other way round). Figure 2.1 shows the rewriting that we have just started, developed
until the string ab ∗ (a + b) has been derived. The production used is represented by
(cid:2)
each ⇒s’ subscript.

We can capitalise on this example with the following deﬁnition.

Deﬁnition 2.2 (Derivation) Having ﬁxed a grammar, G = (NT , T, R, S), and
assigned two strings, v and w over NT ∪T , we say that w is immediately derived from
v (or: v is rewritten in a single step into w), if w is obtained from v by substituting
the body of a production of R whose head is V for a non-terminal symbol, V , in v.
In this case, we will write v ⇒ w.

We say that w is derived from v (or: v is rewritten to w) and we write v ⇒∗ w, if
there exists a ﬁnite (possibly empty) sequence of immediate derivations v ⇒ w0 ⇒
w1 ⇒ · · · ⇒ w.

2.2 Grammar and Syntax

Fig. 2.1 A derivation of the
string ab ∗ (a + b)

31

Using the notation just introduced, and using the grammar for expressions that
we have used so far we can write, for example E ∗ E ⇒∗ ab ∗ (a + I ). Particularly
interesting are those derivations where on the left of the ⇒∗ symbol there is the
grammar’s initial symbol and on the right is a string solely composed of terminal
symbols. In a certain sense, these are maximal derivations which cannot be extended
(by rewriting a non-terminal) either on the left or right. Following the intuition that
has led us to the introduction of grammars, these derivations are the ones that give
us the correct strings as far as the grammar is concerned.

Deﬁnition 2.3 (Generated Language) The language generated by a grammar G =
(NT , T, R, S) is the set L (G) = {w ∈ T ∗ | S ⇒∗ w}.

Note that this deﬁnition, in accordance with everything we said at the start of

Sect. 2.2.1, deﬁnes precisely a language over T ∗.

Derivation Trees

The derivation of a string is a sequential process. In it, there are steps that must be
performed in a certain order. For example, in Fig. 2.1, it is clear that the ﬁrst ⇒10
must follow the ﬁrst ⇒3 because production (10) rewrites the non-terminal symbol
I which does not exist in the initial string (which is composed of only the initial
symbol E) which is introduced by production (3). But there are some steps whose
order could be exchanged. In the derivation in Fig. 2.1, for example, each time that it
is necessary to rewrite a non-terminal symbol, the leftmost is always chosen. We may,
on the other hand, concentrate ﬁrst on the rightmost non-terminal symbol, thereby
obtaining the derivation shown in Fig. 2.2.

The two derivations that we have given for the string ab ∗ (a+b) are, in an intuitive
way, equivalent. Both reconstruct the structure of the string in the same way (in terms
of non-terminal and terminal strings), while they differ only in the order in which
the productions are applied. This fact is made explicit in Fig. 2.3 that represents the
derivation of the string ab ∗ (a + b) in the form of a tree.

32

2 Describing a Programming Language

Fig. 2.2 Another derivation
for the string ab ∗ (a + b)

Fig. 2.3 A derivation tree
for the string ab ∗ (a + b)

E

*

E

I

b

I

a

E

E

+

(

E

I

a

)

E

I

b

Deﬁnition 2.4 Given a grammar, G = (NT , T, R, S), a derivation tree (or parse
tree) is an ordered tree in which:

1. Each node is labelled with a symbol in NT ∪ T ∪ {(cid:2)}.
2. The root is labelled with S.
3. Each interior node is labelled with a symbol in NT .
4. If a certain node has the label A ∈ NT and its children are m1, . . . , mk labelled
respectively with X1, . . . , Xk, where Xi ∈ NT ∪ T for all i ∈ [1, k], then A →
X1 . . . Xk is a production of R.

5. If a node has label (cid:2), then that node is the unique child of its parent A, and A → (cid:2)

is a production in R.

It is easy to see that, a derivation tree can be obtained from any derivation. It is
enough to start at the root (labelled with the initial symbol) and successively adding
a level of children corresponding to the production used during the derivation. By
applying this procedure to the derivation of Fig. 2.1, the derivation tree of Fig. 2.3 is
obtained. Let us now apply this procedure to the derivation in Fig. 2.2. Again, the
tree in Fig. 2.3 is obtained. The two derivations result in the same tree, and this fact
corresponds to the intuition that the two derivations were substantially equivalent.

Derivation trees are one of the most important techniques in the analysis of pro-
gramming language syntax. The structure of the derivation tree indeed expresses, by

2.2 Grammar and Syntax

33

Trees

The concept of tree is of considerable importance in computer science and is also used a great deal
in common language (think of a genealogical tree, for example). A tree is an information structure
that can be deﬁned in different ways and that exists in different “spaces”. For our purposes, we are
interested only in ordered, rooted trees (or simply trees) which we can deﬁne as follows. A (rooted,
ordered) tree is a ﬁnite set of elements called nodes, such that if it is not empty, a particular node
is called the root and the remaining nodes, if they exist, are partitioned between the elements of an
(ordered) n-tuple (cid:5)S1, S2, . . . , Sn(cid:6), n ≥ 0, where each Si , i ∈ [1, N ] is a tree.

Intuitively, therefore, a tree allows us to group nodes into levels where, at level 0, we have

the root, at level 1 we have the roots of the trees S1, S2, . . . , Sn and so on.

Another (equivalent) deﬁnition of tree is often used. It is probably more signiﬁcant for the
reader who is familiar with genealogical trees, botanical classiﬁcations, taxonomies, etc. According
to this deﬁnition, a tree is a particular case of a graph: a (rooted, ordered) tree is therefore a pair
T = (N , A), where N is a ﬁnite set of nodes and A is a set of ordered pairs of nodes, called arcs,
such that:

• The number of arcs is equal to one less than the number of nodes.
• T is connected, that is, for each pair of nodes, n, m ∈ N , there exists a sequence of distinct nodes
n0, n1, . . . , nk such that n0 = n and nk = m and the pair (ni , ni+1) is an arc, for i = 0, . . . , k −1.
• A (unique) node, r , is said to be the root and the nodes are ordered by level according to the
following inductive deﬁnition. The root is at level 0; if a node n is at level i, and there exists the
arc (n, m) ∈ A then node m is at level i + 1.

• Given a node, n, the nodes m such that there exists an arc (n, m) ∈ A are said to be the children
of n (and n is said to be their parent); for every node n ∈ N , a total order is established on the
set of all the children of n.

Using a curious mix of botanical, mathematical and “familiar” terms, nodes with the same
parent are said to be siblings while nodes without children are said to be leaves. The root is the only
node without a parent.

means of its subtrees, the logical structure that the grammar assigns to the string. For
example, the tree in Fig. 2.4 corresponds to the following derivation:

E ⇒2 E + E

⇒3 E ∗ E + E
⇒1 I ∗ E + E
⇒7 a ∗ E + E
⇒1 a ∗ I + E
⇒8 a ∗ b + E
⇒1 a ∗ b + I
⇒7 a ∗ b + a
In the tree in Fig. 2.4, we can see that the subexpression a ∗ b appears as a left child
of a sum. This expresses the fact that the string a ∗ b + a must be interpreted as “ﬁrst
multiply a by b and add the result to a”, given that in order to compute the sum, the
operand present in the left subtree is needed.

34

2 Describing a Programming Language

Fig. 2.4 A derivation tree
for the string a ∗ b + a

Fig. 2.5 Another derivation
tree for the string a ∗ b + a

E

*

E

*

E

I

a

E

I

a

E

+

E

+

E

I

a

E

I

a

E

I

b

E

I

b

Ambiguity

Let us consider the following derivation (again using the grammar of the example
on Sect. 2.2.1):

E ⇒3 E ∗ E
⇒1 I ∗ E
⇒7 a ∗ E
⇒2 a ∗ E + E
⇒1 a ∗ I + E
⇒8 a ∗ b + E
⇒1 a ∗ b + I
⇒7 a ∗ b + a
If we construct the corresponding derivation tree, we obtain the tree in Fig. 2.5.
Comparing the trees in Figs. 2.4 and 2.5, we see that we have two different trees
producing the same string. Reading the leaves of the two trees from left to right, in
both cases, we obtain the string a ∗ b + a. Let us observe, however, that the two
trees are radically different. The second assigns a structure to the same string that is
quite different (and therefore reveals a different precedence implicit in the arithmetic
operators). If we want to use derivation trees to describe the logical structure of a
string, we are in a bad position. The grammar of Example 2.2 is incapable of assigning
a unique structure to the string in question. According to how the derivation is
constructed, the precedence of the two arithmetic operators differs. Let us now see
a formal deﬁnition of these concepts.

2.2 Grammar and Syntax

35

First, let us be clear about what it means to read or visit the leaves of a tree “from
left to right”. Visiting a tree consists of following a path through the tree’s nodes so
that each node is examined exactly once. There are many ways to visit nodes (the
most common being depth-ﬁrst, breadth-ﬁrst, and symmetric visits), which, when
applied to the same tree, produce different sequences of nodes. If only the leaves are
considered, however, each and every one of these methods produces the same result
for which we can use the following deﬁnitions:

Deﬁnition 2.5 Let T = (N , A), be a non-empty, ordered tree with root r . The result
of the left-to-right traversal of T is the sequence of nodes (actually: leaves) obtained
by the following recursive deﬁnition:

• If r has no children, the result of the traversal is r .
• If r has k children, m1, . . . , mk, let T1, . . . , Tk be the subtrees of T such that Ti has
mi as its root (Ti therefore contains mi and all of that part of T which is underneath
this node). The result of the traversal is the sequence of nodes obtained by visiting
T1 to Tk in turn, from left to right.

A this point, we can say what it means for a string to admit a derivation tree.

Deﬁnition 2.6 We say that a string of characters admits a derivation tree T if it is
the result of a left-to-right traversal of T .

Finally, we can give the deﬁnition that interests us.

Deﬁnition 2.7 (Ambiguity) A grammar, G, is ambiguous if there exists at least one
string of L (G) which admits more than one derivation tree.

We remark that ambiguity comes not from the existence of many derivations for
the same string (a common and innocuous property) but from the fact that (at least)
one string has more than one derivation tree.

An ambiguous grammar is useless as description of a programming language
because it cannot be used to translate (compile) a program in a unique fashion.
Fortunately, given an ambiguous grammar it is often possible to transform it into
another, unambiguous, grammar that generates the same language.5 Techniques for
grammar disambiguation are outside the scope of this book. By way of example,
Fig. 2.6 shows an unambiguous grammar whose generated language coincides with
the one given in the example on Sect. 2.2.1.

This grammar interprets the structure of an expression according to the usual con-
cept of arithmetic operator precedence. Unary minus (“−”) has the highest prece-
dence, followed by ∗, followed in their turn by + and binary − (which have the same

5 There exist pathological cases of languages which are generated only by ambiguous grammars.
These languages have no relevance to programming languages.

36

2 Describing a Programming Language

Fig. 2.6 An unambiguous grammar for the language of expressions

Fig. 2.7 Grammar for Java conditional commands

precedence). The grammar interprets, then, a sequence of operators at the same level
of precedence by association to the right. For example, the string a + b + a will
be assigned the same structure as the string a + (b + a). The absence of ambiguity
is paid for by increased complexity. There are more non-terminals and the intuitive
interpretation of the grammar is therefore more difﬁcult.

The need to provide unambiguous grammars explains the contortions that appear
in the deﬁnitions of some programming languages. For example, Fig. 2.7 shows an
extract of the ofﬁcial grammar for Java’s conditional command (its if) (the non-
terminal symbols are printed in italic, while the terminal symbols in this extract are
if, else and brackets).

This grammar is interesting for two reasons. First, note that what are formally
considered single symbols (terminal or non-terminal) in context-free grammars are
here represented by words composed of a number of characters. For example, if rep-
resents a single terminal symbol and, analogously, IfThenElseStatement represents
a non-terminal symbol.

This happens because, in the deﬁnition of a programming language, it is prefer-
ential to use meaningful words (if, then, else) which can, up to certain limits,
suggest an intuitive meaning, rather than symbols which would be harder to under-
stand by the language user. In other words, as we will better see in the next chapters,
that the use of (meaningful) symbolic names deﬁnitely makes programming easier.
Analogously, for non-terminal symbols, they make the grammar easier to understand.
It is deﬁnitely better to use names such as Statement rather than single symbols.

The second interesting aspect of the grammar is its complex nature. This com-
plexity is necessary to resolve the ambiguity of strings (programs) such as the one
exempliﬁed by the following skeleton program:

2.3 Contextual Syntactic Constraints

37

if ( e x p r e s s i o n 1 ) if ( e x p r e s s i o n 2 ) c o m m a n d 1 ;

else c o m m a n d 2 ;

Java, like a great many other programming languages allows conditional com-
mands both with an else branch and without it. When an if command without
else is combined with an if with an else branch (as in the case of the program
appearing above), it is necessary to determine which of the two ifs is the owner
of the single else. The grammar in Fig. 2.7 is an unambiguous one which makes
“an else clause belong to the innermost if to which it might possibly belong”
(from the Java deﬁnition [2]). In simple words, the else is paired with the second
if (the one which tests expression2). Intuitively, this happens because, once
an if command with an else is introduced by use of the non-terminal symbol
IfThenElseStatement, the command in the then branch will be unable to hold an if
command without an else, as can be seen by inspection of the rules which deﬁne
the non-terminal symbol StatementNoShortIf.

2.3 Contextual Syntactic Constraints

The syntactic correctness of a phrase of a programming language sometimes depends
on the context in which that phrase occurs. Let us consider, for example, the assign-
ment I = R+3; and assume that indeed the productions in the grammar allow the
correct derivation of this string. It might be the case, though, that the assignment is
incorrect at the position in the program at which it occurs. For example, if the lan-
guage requires the declaration of variables, it is necessary for programs to contain the
declarations of I and R before the assignment. Moreover, if the language is statically
typed, it could be necessary that the type of the expression R+3 is compatible6 with
that of the variable I.

Strings that are correct with respect to the grammar, therefore, could be legal only
in a given context. There are many examples of these contextual syntactic constraints:

• An identiﬁer must be declared before use (Pascal, C, Java).
• The number of actual parameters to a function must be the same as the formal

parameters (C, Pascal, Java, etc.).

• In the case of assignment, the type of an expression must be compatible with that

of the variable to which it is assigned (C, Pascal, Java, etc.).

• Assignments to the control variable of a for loop are not permitted (Pascal).
• Before using a variable, there must have been an assignment to it (Java, Python).
• A method can be redeﬁned (overridden) only by a method with the same signature

(Java) or with a compatible signature (Java5).

• . . .

6 All these concepts will be introduced below. For now, an intuitive understanding of these concepts
will sufﬁce.

38

2 Describing a Programming Language

These are certainly syntactic constraints. However, their contextual nature makes
it impossible to describe them using a context-free grammar (the name of this class
of grammars was chosen on purpose). A book on formal languages is required to
go into detail on these issues; here, it sufﬁces to note that there exist other types of
grammar, called contextual grammars.7 These grammars permit the description of
cases such as this. These grammars are difﬁcult to write, and to process. Moreover,
there are no automatic techniques for efﬁcient generation of translators, such as
exist, on the other hand, for context-free grammars. This suggests, therefore, that
use of grammars should be limited to the non-contextual description of syntax and
then to express the additional contextual constraints using natural language or using
formal techniques such as transition systems (which we will see in Sect. 2.5 when
we consider semantics).

In programming language terminology, these contextual constraints that appear in
the syntactic aspects of a language are usually called static semantic constraint. In the
jargon, “syntax” usually means “describable using a context-free grammar”, “static
semantics” means “describable with veriﬁable contextual constraints on a static basis
using the program text”, while “dynamic semantics” (or simply “semantics”) refers
to everything that happens when a program is executed.

The distinction between context-free and context-dependent syntax (that is, static
semantics) is established precisely by the expressive power of context-free gram-
mars. The distinction between syntax and semantics is not always clear. Some cases
are clear. Let us assume, for example, that we have a language whose deﬁnition estab-
lishes that should a division by 0 happen during execution, the abstract machine for
the language must report it with an explicit error. This is clearly a dynamic semantic
constraint. But let us assume, now, that the deﬁnition of another language is speciﬁed
as follows:

A program is syntactically incorrect when a division by 0 can happen.

The program in Fig. 2.8 would be syntactically incorrect in this hypothetical lan-
guage because there exists a sequence of executions (those in which the read com-
mand assigns the value 0 to A) which causes division by zero. Does the constraint
that we have stated above (which certainly cannot be expressed in a free grammar)
belong to static or dynamic semantics? It is clear that it refers to a dynamic event
(division by zero) but the constraint, to be meaningful (that is, that it really does

Fig. 2.8 A program that can
cause a division by 0

7 In extreme synthesis, in a contextual grammar, a production can take the form (which is more
general than in a context-free grammar) u Av → uwv, where u, v and w are strings over T ∪ NT .
Fundamental to this production, the non-terminal symbol A can be rewritten to w only if it appears
in a certain context (the one described by u and v).

2.4 Compilers

39

exclude some programs) would have to be detected statically (as we have done for
the simple program given above). A person can decide that it is syntactically incor-
rect without executing it but only from looking at the code and reasoning about it.
More important than its classiﬁcation, is understanding whether we have a veriﬁable
constraint or not. Otherwise stated, is it really possible to implement an abstract
machine for such a language, or does the very nature of the constraint imply that
there can exist no abstract machine which is able to check it in a static fashion for
an arbitrary program?

These are questions that we cannot immediately answer, even though they are of
paramount importance, because they concern what we can, and cannot, do with an
abstract machine. We will touch brieﬂy these issues in the next chapter (Chap. 3).

2.4 Compilers

We may ﬁnally see how the syntactic description of a language can be used auto-
matically to translate a program. We know from Chap. 1 that such an automatic
translator is called a compiler, whose general logical structure is shown in Fig. 2.10.
It is characterised by a cascaded series of phases. The various phases, starting with
a string representing the program in the source language, generate various internal
intermediate representations until a string in the object language is generated. Note
that, as seen in the previous chapter, in this context, “object language” does not nec-
essarily equate to “machine code” or to “low-level language”. It is merely a language
towards which the translation is directed. In what follows, we brieﬂy describe the
different phases of compilation. We do not pretend to explain how to construct a
compiler (see [3]), but just to ﬁx some ideas useful for our study of programming
languages.

Lexical Analysis

The aim of lexical analysis is to read the symbols (characters) forming the program
sequentially from the input and to group these symbols into meaningful logical units,
which we call tokens (which are analogous, for our programming language, to the
words in the dictionary of a natural language). For example, the lexical analyser of C
or Java, when presented with the string x = 1 + foo++; will produce 7 tokens:
the identiﬁer x, the assignment operator =, the number 1, the addition operator +, the
identiﬁer foo, the auto increment operator ++ and ﬁnally the command termination
token;. Particularly important tokens are the reserved words of the language (such
as for, if, else, etc.), operators, open and close brackets (such as { and } in C
or Java, but also indent and unindent in Python). Lexical analysis (or scanning) is a
very simple operation which scans the input text of the source program from left to
right, taking a single pass to recognise tokens. No check is yet made on the sequence
of tokens such as, for example, checking that brackets are correctly balanced. As
discussed in detail in the box, the technical tool used for lexical analysis is a particular

40

2 Describing a Programming Language

Abstract and Concrete Syntax

The grammar of a programming language deﬁnes the language as a set of strings. This set of
strings corresponds in a natural way to the set of their derivation trees. These trees are much more
interesting than the strings. First, they abstract from the speciﬁc lexical characteristic of the tokens.
It can also happen that lexically different structures can result in the same tree. The tree in Fig. 2.9
could correspond to the Python string:

if A ==0: X =0
else : X =1

or to the Java string:

if ( A ==0) X =0; else X =1;

As we have already repeatedly observed, derivation trees are interesting because they express

the canonical structure that can be assigned to the string.

Not all derivation trees correspond to legal programs. We know that static semantic analysis
has the task of selecting those trees satisfying the contextual constraints of the language. The set of
trees resulting from this process constitutes the abstract syntax of language. This is a much more
convenient way of thinking of a language if we are interested in its manipulation (and not merely
in writing correct programs in it).

class of generative grammars (regular grammars). The use of a grammar to describe
the elements of the lexicon is due both to the necessity of efﬁciently recognising
these elements, and to the fact that, unlike the case of natural language lexicons,
lexicons for programming languages can be formed from an inﬁnite set of words and
therefore a simple list, so the one used in a normal dictionary is inadequate (think,
for example, of the possibility of deﬁning identiﬁers as sequences of characters of
arbitrary length starting with a particular letter).

Syntactic Analysis

Once the list of tokens has been constructed, the syntactic analyser (or parser) seeks
to construct a derivation tree for this list. This will be a derivation tree in the grammar
of the language. Each leaf of this tree must correspond to a token from the list obtained
by the scanner. Moreover, these leaves, read from left to right, must form a correct
phrase (or a sequence of terminal symbols) in the language. We already know that

Fig. 2.9 An abstract syntax
tree

ComCond

Cond

ThenBranch

ElseBranch

Exp

Eq

Exp

Com

Com

A

0

X

Assn

Exp

X

Assn

Exp

0

1

2.4 Compilers

Fig. 2.10 Organisation of a
compiler

Symbol
table

41

Source Program

Lexical
analysis

Token list

Syntactic
analysis

Derivation tree

Semantic
analysis

Augmented derivation tree

Generation of
intermediate form

Intermediate form

Optimisation

Optimised intermediate form

Code
generation

Object code

such trees represent the logical structure of the program which will be employed by
the successive phases of compilation.

It can happen that the parser is unable to construct a derivation tree. This happens
when the input string is not correct with reference to the language’s grammar. In such
a case, the parser reports the errors it has encountered and compilation is aborted.
In reality, lexical and syntactic analysis are interleaved in a more direct fashion than
appears from these notes (in particular, the two phases are not sequential but the
scanner produces a token whenever the parser requests for one).

Semantic Analysis

The derivation tree (which represents the syntactic correctness of the input string)
is subjected to checks of the language’s various context-based constraints. As we
have seen, it is at this stage that declarations, types, number of function parameters,
etc., are processed. As these checks are performed, the derivation tree is augmented
with the information derived from them and new structures are generated. By way of

42

2 Describing a Programming Language

Regular Grammars

The difference between lexical and syntactic analysis can be made precise using a formal classiﬁca-
tion of grammars. If a grammar has all productions of the form A → bB (or in the form A → Bb),
where A and B are non-terminal symbols (B can also be absent or coincide with A) and b is a single
terminal symbol, the grammar is said to be regular. In Example 2.2, the (sub-) grammar based on
the non-terminal symbol I is a regular grammar (while the subgrammar for E is not).

The expressive power of regular grammars is highly limited. In particular, using a regular
grammar, it is not possible to “count” an arbitrary number of characters. As a consequence, it is not
possible to express the balancing of syntactic structures such as brackets using a regular grammar.
Technically, lexical analysis is the ﬁrst phase of translation which checks that the input string
can be decomposed into tokens, each of which is described by a regular grammar (in Example 2.2,
lexical analysis would have recognised the sequences of a and b as instances of the non-terminal
symbol I ).

Once the sequence of tokens has been obtained, syntactic analysis takes place using a properly
context-free grammar which uses the tokens produced by the preceding lexical analysis as its
terminal symbols.

an example, every token that corresponds to a variable identiﬁer will be associated
with its type, the place of declaration and other useful information (for example its
scope, see Chap. 4). To avoid useless duplication, this information is, in general,
collected into structures external to the derivation tree. Among these structures, the
one in which information about identiﬁers is collected is called the symbol table.
The symbol table plays an essential role in successive phases.

At the cost of boring the reader, so that we do not confuse it with what we call
semantics in Sect. 2.5, let us note that the term semantic analysis is an historical relic
and that it is concerned with context-based syntactic constraints.

Generation of Intermediate Forms

An appropriate traversal of the augmented derivation tree allows an initial phase
of code generation. It is not yet possible to generate code in the object language,
given that there are many optimisations left to do and they are independent of the
speciﬁc object language. Moreover, a compiler is often implemented to generate
code for a whole series of object languages (for example, machine code for different
architectures), not just one. It is useful, therefore, to concentrate all choices relating
to a speciﬁc language in a single phase and to generate code to an intermediate form,
which is designed to be independent of both the source and the object languages.

Code Optimisation

The code obtained from the preceding phases by repeatedly traversing the deriva-
tion tree is fairly inefﬁcient. There are many optimisations that can be made before
generating object code. Typical operations that can be performed are:

2.5 Semantics

43

• Dead code removal. That is, removal of pieces of code that can never be executed

because there is no execution sequence that can reach them.

• In-line expansion of function calls. Some function (procedure) calls can be sub-
stituted by the body of the associated function, making execution faster. It also
makes other optimisations possible.

• Subexpression factorisation. Some programs compute the same value more than
once. If, and when, this fact is discovered by the compiler, the value of the common
subexpression can be calculated once only and then stored.

• Loop optimisations. Iterations are the places where the biggest optimisations can
be performed. Among these, the most common consists of removing from inside
a loop the computation of subexpressions whose value remains constant during
different iterations.

Code Generation

Starting with optimised intermediate form, the ﬁnal object code is generated. There
follows, in general, a last phase of optimisation which depends upon the speciﬁc
characteristics of the object language. In a compiler that generates machine code,
an important part of this last phase is register assignment (decisions as to which
variables should be stored in which processor registers). This is a choice of enormous
importance for the efﬁciency of the ﬁnal program.

2.5 Semantics

The description of the semantics of a programming language is more complex than
its syntactic description. This complexity is due both to technical problems, as well
to the need to mediate between two opposing issues: the need for exactness as well as
for ﬂexibility. As far as exactness is concerned, a precise and unambiguous descrip-
tion is required of what must be expected from every syntactically correct construct
so that every user knows a priori (that is before program execution), and in a manner
independent of the architecture, what will happen at runtime. This search for exact-
ness, however, must not preclude different implementations of the same language,
all of which are correct with respect to the semantics. The semantic speciﬁcation
must therefore also be ﬂexible, that is, it must not anticipate choices that are to be
made when the language is implemented (and which therefore do not play a part in
the deﬁnition of the language itself).

It would not be difﬁcult to achieve exactness at the expense of ﬂexibility. It is
enough to give the semantics of a language using a speciﬁc compiler on a speciﬁc
physical architecture. The ofﬁcial meaning of a program is given by its execution
on this architecture after translation using that compiler. This solution has clearly no
ﬂexibility–there exists only one implementation (the ofﬁcial one) and all the other
implementations are completely equivalent. But to what level of detail is the canoni-

44

2 Describing a Programming Language

cal implementation normative? Is the computation time of a particular program part
of its deﬁnition? Is the reporting of errors? How can typically architecture-dependent
input/output commands be ported to a different architecture? When the implementa-
tion technology of the physical architecture changes, how does the semantics change?
One of the difﬁculties of a semantic deﬁnition is that of ﬁnding the happy medium
between exactness and ﬂexibility, in such a way as to remove ambiguity, still leaving
room for implementation. This situation suggests using formal methods to describe
the semantics. Methods of this kind have existed for a long time for the artiﬁcial lan-
guages of mathematical logic and they have been adapted by computer scientists for
their own ends. Yet, some semantic phenomena make formal descriptions complex
and not easily usable by anyone who does not have the appropriate skills. It is for
this reason that the majority of ofﬁcial programming language deﬁnitions use natural
language for their semantic description. This does not detract from the fact that for-
mal methods for semantics are often used in the preparatory phases of the design of
a programming language, or to describe some of its particular characteristics, where
it is paramount to avoid ambiguity at the cost of simplicity.

Formal methods for semantics divide into two main families: denotational and
operational semantics.8 Denotational semantics is the application to programming
languages of techniques developed for the semantics of logic-mathematical lan-
guages. The meaning of a program is given by a function that expresses the input/out-
put behaviour of the program itself. The domain and codomain of this function are
suitable mathematical structures, such as the environment and the memory (store),
that are internal to the language. Reﬁned mathematical techniques (continuity, ﬁxed
points, etc.) allow the appropriate treatment of phenomena such as iteration and
recursion (see [4]).

In the operational approach, on the other hand, there are no external entities (for
example, functions) associated with language constructs. Using appropriate methods,
an operational semantics speciﬁes the behaviour of the abstract machine. That is, it
formally deﬁnes the interpreter, making reference to an abstract formalism at a much
lower level. The various operational techniques differ (sometimes profoundly) in
their choice of formalism. Some semantics use formal automata, others use systems
of logic-mathematical rules, yet others prefer transition systems to specify the state
transformations induced by a program.

This is not a book in which a treatment of these semantic techniques can be
given. We content ourselves with a simple example of techniques based on transition
systems to give semantics for a rudimentary imperative language. This technique,
called SOS (Structured Operational Semantics, [5]), is highly versatile and has been
effectively used in giving the semantics to some languages including Standard ML
(an inﬂuential functional language).

Figure 2.11 shows the grammar of a simple language. For reasons of readability
(and so that we can obtain a concise semantics), we have a grammar with inﬁnite

8 For completeness, we should also talk about algebraic and axiomatic semantics, but simplicity
and conciseness require us to ignore them.

2.5 Semantics

Fig. 2.11 Syntax of a simple
imperative language

45

productions for the Num and Var non-terminal symbols. The explicit presence of
brackets around each binary operator application eliminates possible problems of
ambiguity.

We need to introduce some notation. We will use n to denote an arbitrary Num
(numeric constant); using X , we will denote an arbitrary Var (variable). We write a
for an arbitrary AExp (arithmetic expression). We use b to denote an arbitrary BExp
(boolean expression, where tt and ff denote the values true and false, respectively).
We write c for arbitrary Comm (commands). We use, when needed, subscripts to
distinguish between objects of the same syntactic category (for example, we will
write a1, a2, etc., for AExps).

State

The semantics of a command in our language uses a simple memory model which
stores the values associated with the Vars. In this model, a state is a ﬁnite sequence of
pairs of the form (X, n) which we can read as “in the current state, the variable X has
the value n” (in our little language, the value is always an integer). Given a command
c (that is a derivation tree that is correct according to the grammar in Fig. 2.11), its
reference state is given by a sequence of pairs which includes all Vars which are
named in c. We denote an arbitrary state by σ or τ , with or without subscripts.

We need to deﬁne some operations on states: modiﬁcation of an existing state and
retrieval of a variable’s value in the current state. To this end, given a state, σ , a Var
X and a value v, we write σ [X ← v] to denote a new state that is the same as σ but
differs from it by associating X with the value v (and thereby losing any previous
association to X , if any). Given a state, σ , and a variable, X , we write σ (X ) for the
value that σ associates with X ; this value is undeﬁned if X does not appear in the
domain of σ (σ is therefore a partial function).

Example 2.4 Let us ﬁx σ = [(X, 3), (Y, 5)], we have σ [X ← 7] = [(X, 7), (Y, 5)].
(cid:2)
We also have σ (Y ) = 5 and σ [X ← 7](X ) = 7; σ (W ) is undeﬁned.

46

Transitions

2 Describing a Programming Language

Structured operational semantics can be seen as an elegant way of deﬁning the behav-
ior of an abstract machine without going into any details about its implementation.9
This behavior is expressed in terms of the elementary computational steps of the
abstract machine. The formal way in which structured operational semantics deﬁnes
the meaning of a program, c, is in terms of a transition which expresses a step in the
transformation (of the state and/or of the program itself) induced by the execution
of the command. The simplest form of transition is:

(cid:5)c, σ (cid:6) → τ,
where c is a command, σ the starting state and τ the terminal state. The interpretation
that we give to this notation is that if we start the execution of c in the state σ , the
execution terminates (in a single step) with state τ . For example, the transition which
deﬁnes the skip command is

(cid:5)skip, σ (cid:6) → σ.

Starting in any state, σ , skip terminates leaving the state unchanged.

In more complex cases, a terminal situation will be reached not in a single step,
but rather in many steps which progressively transform the state. The command, c, is
progressively executed a part at a time until the whole has been “consumed”. These
little steps are expressed by transitions of the form:
(cid:5)c, σ (cid:6) → (cid:5)c(cid:11), σ (cid:11)(cid:6).

For example, one of the transitions which deﬁne the conditional command will be:
(cid:5)if tt then c1 else c2, σ (cid:6) → (cid:5)c1, σ (cid:6),

This means that if the boolean condition is true, the command in the then branch
must be executed. Some transitions, ﬁnally, are conditional: if some command, c1,
has a transition, then the command c has another transition. Conditional transitions
take the form of a rule, expressed as a fraction:

(cid:5)c1, σ1(cid:6) → (cid:5)c(cid:11)
1
(cid:5)c, σ (cid:6) → (cid:5)c(cid:11), σ (cid:11)(cid:6)

, σ (cid:11)
1

(cid:5)c2, σ2(cid:6) → (cid:5)c(cid:11)
2

(cid:6)

, σ (cid:11)
2

(cid:6)

.

We read this rule in the following way. If the command c1, starting in state σ1, can
perform a computational step that transforms itself into command c(cid:11)
1, and
if the command c2, starting in σ2, can perform a computational step and transform
itself into the command c(cid:11)
2, then the command c, starting in the state σ can
perform a computational step and transform itself into the command c(cid:11) in state σ (cid:11). It
is clear that a speciﬁc rule will express a number of meaningful relationships between
c, c1 and c2 (and their respective states). In general, c1 and c2 will be subcommands
of c.10

1 in state σ (cid:11)

2 in state σ (cid:11)

9 Using terminology that we will use again in the ﬁnal chapters of this book, we can say that it is a
declarative description of the language’s abstract machine.
10 What we have called conditional rules are the inductive deﬁnition of the transition relation →.

2.5 Semantics

47

Fig. 2.12 Semantics of arithmetic expressions

Expression Semantics

Figure 2.12 shows the rules for the semantics of arithmetic expressions. The ﬁrst three
rules are terminal rules (that is, the computation to the right of the arrow is in a form
to which no more transitions can be applied). In order of presentation, they deﬁne
the semantics of a variable, of addition in the case in which both of the summands
are constants, of subtraction in the case in which both its arguments are constants
and its result is a natural number. Note that no semantics is given for expressions
such as 5–7. The second group of four rules is formed of conditional rules. The ﬁrst
pair deﬁnes the semantics of sums and expresses the fact that to calculate the value
of a sum, it is necessary ﬁrst to evaluate its two arguments separately. The rules do
not specify the order of evaluation for the arguments of an addition or a subtraction.
In our simple language, the evaluation of an expression does not modify the state.
The state is present in the transition rules only because is used to obtain the value of
a name, in the ﬁrst rule. In more realistic languages, expressions may also modify
the state, by side effects.

Figure 2.13 shows the semantics of logical expressions, along the same ideas used
for arithmetic expressions. In this ﬁgure, bv denotes a constant boolean value (tt or
ff). The premises of the two rules of the fourth line (those for the evaluation of the
equality comparison, ==) are transitions for arithmetic expressions.

Command Semantics
We have noted that the state, σ , always remains unaltered during the evaluation of an
expression. This changes for the semantics of commands as shown in Fig. 2.14. Rules
(c1), (c2), (c6), and (c7) are terminal ones: the transition is of the form (cid:5)c, σ (cid:6) → τ ,
with only a state on the right of →. The premise of rule (c4) is always a terminal
transition. The other rules (which deﬁne a transition of the form (cid:5)c, σ (cid:6) → (cid:5)c(cid:11), τ (cid:6))
make the computation of a complex command proceeds, by evaluating one of its
subcommands (or subexpressions).

48

2 Describing a Programming Language

Fig. 2.13 Semantics of boolean expressions

Fig. 2.14 Semantics of commands

Computations

A computation is a sequence of transitions which cannot be extended by another
transition. Moreover, each transformation in a computation must be allowed by some
rule.

Example 2.5 Let us consider the following program, c:

X := 1; while ¬(X == 0) do X := (X − 1)

Let us ﬁx a state which includes all the variables mentioned in the program, for
example, σ = [(X, 6)]. We can calculate the computation of c in σ as follows. We

2.5 Semantics

49

write c(cid:11) to denote the iterative command while ¬(X == 0) do X := (X − 1). It is
not difﬁcult to see that the computation generated by c is the following:

(cid:5)c, σ (cid:6)
→ (cid:5)c(cid:11), σ [X ← 1](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)if¬(X == 0) thenX := (X − 1); c(cid:11) elseskip, σ [X ← 1](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)if¬(1 == 0) thenX := (X − 1); c(cid:11) elseskip, σ [X ← 1](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)if¬ff thenX := (X − 1); c(cid:11) elseskip, σ [X ← 1](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)iftt thenX := (X − 1); c(cid:11) elseskip, σ [X ← 1](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)X := (X − 1); c(cid:11), σ [X ← 1](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)X := (1 − 1); c(cid:11), σ [X ← 1](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)X := 0; c(cid:11), σ [X ← 1](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)c(cid:11), σ [X ← 0](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)if¬(X == 0) thenX := (X − 1); c(cid:11) elseskip, σ [X ← 0](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)if¬(0 == 0) thenX := (X − 1); c(cid:11) elseskip, σ [X ← 0](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)if¬tt thenX := (X − 1); c(cid:11) elseskip, σ [X ← 0](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)ifff thenX := (X − 1); c(cid:11) elseskip, σ [X ← 0](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)skip, σ [X ← 0](cid:6)
→ σ [X ← 0]

The computation in the example is a terminated computation, in the sense that,
after a ﬁnite number of transitions, we are left with a terminal transition, where no
other transition is possible. However, the deﬁnition of computation does not require
that a computation be ﬁnite but only that it cannot be extended. There could be,
therefore, inﬁnite computations, as in the following example:

Example 2.6 Consider the following program, d:

X := 1; while (X == 1) do skip
Assume we are in the state τ = [(X, 0)]. Let d(cid:11) be the command while (X == 1)

do skip. We have:

(cid:5)d, τ (cid:6)
→ (cid:5)d(cid:11), τ [X ← 1](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)if(X == 1) then skip ; d(cid:11) elseskip, τ [X ← 1](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)if(1 == 1) then skip ; d(cid:11) elseskip, τ [X ← 1](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)iftt then skip ; d(cid:11) elseskip, τ [X ← 1](cid:6)
→ (cid:5) skip ; d(cid:11), τ [X ← 1](cid:6)
→ (cid:5)d(cid:11), τ [X ← 1](cid:6)
→ . . .

There exist, therefore, two fundamentally different types of computations: ﬁnite
ones (also called terminating) and divergent ones (that is, inﬁnite ones which corre-
spond, intuitively, to looping programs).

(cid:2)

50

2 Describing a Programming Language

2.6 Pragmatics

The syntax and semantics of a programming language are always given with the
most accurate precision. The same is not true for the pragmatics of a language. Let
us recall that the pragmatics of a language answers the question “what is the purpose
of this construct?” or “what use is a certain command?” It is clear, therefore, that
the pragmatics of a programming language is not established once and for all during
its deﬁnition (that is, the deﬁnition of its syntax and semantics). On the contrary,
it evolves with the use of that language. The suggestions about programming style
are part of pragmatics. For example, that jumps (gotos) should be avoided at all
possible times. The choice of the most appropriate mode for passing parameters
to a function is also a pragmatic question, as is the choice between bounded and
unbounded iteration. Sometimes the deﬁnition of a language will suggest that a
certain use of a construct is the “preferred one”, but it does not rule out other uses.
In a sense, the pragmatics of a programming language coincides with software
engineering (the discipline which studies methods for the design and production of
software). As such, it is not treated in this book. For many other aspects, on the
other hand, clarifying the purpose and use of constructs is an essential part of the
study of a programming language. In the following, we will often make pragmatical
comments, usually without explicitly labeling them as such.

2.7 Implementation

The ﬁnal level of programming language description will not be considered in this
book in details. Implementing a language means writing a compiler for it, as well
as implementing an abstract machine for the compiler’s object language; or to write
an interpreter and implement the abstract machine in the language in which the
interpreter is written. Alternatively, as happens in practice, a mix of both techniques
is employed. Once more, this is not a book in which we can be exhaustive about these
matters. But it would not be correct to present the constructions of programming
languages without some reference to their implementation, and their cost. Even
without specifying the set of constructions in an interpreter, for each construct, we
should always ask: “How is it to be implemented?”, “At what cost?” The answer to
these questions will also help us to understand the linguistic aspects (why a certain
construct is formed in a certain way), as well as the pragmatic ones (how can a certain
construct best be used).

2.8 Summary

The chapter introduced the fundamental techniques for the description and imple-
mentation of a programming language.

2.10 Exercises

51

• The distinction between syntax, semantics, pragmatics and implementation. Each

of these disciplines describes a crucial aspect of the language.

• Context-free grammars. A formal method essential for the deﬁnition of a lan-

guage’s syntax.

• Derivation trees and ambiguity. Derivation trees represent the logical structure
of a string. The existence of a unique tree for every string permits a canonical
interpretation to be assigned to it.

• Static semantics. Not all syntactic aspects of a language are describable using
grammars: Static semantic checks are concerned with eliminating from legal pro-
grams those strings which, though correct as far as the grammar is concerned, do
not respect additional contextual constraints.

• The organisation of a compiler.
• Structured operational semantics. A formal method for describing the semantics

of programming languages based on transition systems.

2.9 Bibliographical Notes

The literature on the topics covered in this chapter is vast, even considering only
introductory material. We limit ourselves to citing [6], the latest edition of a classic
text on formal languages used by generations of students. For compiler-construction
methods, we refer the reader to [3,7]. An introduction to operational and denotational
semantics is [4].

2.10 Exercises

1. Consider the grammar G(cid:11)(cid:11), obtained from that in Fig. 2.6 by substituting the

productions for the non-terminal symbol T with the following:

Show that G(cid:11)(cid:11) is ambiguous.

T → A | E ∗ T.

2. Give the obvious ambiguous grammar for the conditional command if, then,

else.

3. Using the grammar fragment in Fig. 2.7 as a reference point, construct a deriva-

tion tree for the string

if ( e x p r e s s i o n 1 ) if ( e x p r e s s i o n 2 ) c o m m a n d 1

else c o m m a n d 2

Assume that the following derivations exist:
Expression ⇒∗
Expression ⇒∗
StatementWithoutTrailingSubstatement ⇒∗

expression1,
expression2,

command,

52

2 Describing a Programming Language

StatementWithoutTrailingSubstatement ⇒∗

command.

4. Deﬁne a grammar that will generate all the pairs of balanced curly brackets

(braces).

5. Deﬁne a grammar that generates the language {anbm | n, m ≥ 1} using only
productions of the form N → t M or N → t, where N and M are any non-
terminal symbol and t is any terminal symbol. Try to give an intuitive explanation
of why there exists no grammar with these characteristics which generates the
language {anbn | n ≥ 1}.

6. Modify the rule of Fig. 2.12 so as to describe a right-to-left evaluation of arith-

metic expressions.

7. Calculate the computation of the command

X := 1; while ¬(X == 3) do X := (X + 1)

starting with a chosen state.

8. In Example 2.5, the last transition has as its right member only a state (and not
a pair composed of a command and a state). Is this always the case in a ﬁnite
computation? (Hint: consider the command X := 0; X := (X − 1), starting with
any state whatsoever which includes X .)

9. State what the computation corresponding to the following command is:

X := 1; X := (X − 1); X := (X − 1); X := 5

10. Considering Exercises 8 and 9, state a criterion which allows the division of ﬁnite
computations into those which are correct and those which terminate because of
an error.

References

1. C.W. Morris, Foundations of the theory of signs, in Writings on the Theory of Signs (Mouton,

The Hague, 1938), pp. 17–74

2. J. Gosling, B. Joy, G. Steele, G. Bracha, The Java Language Speciﬁcation, 3/E (Addison Wesley,
2005). The last speciﬁcation available at the time of printing is that of Java SE 19, https://www.
docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/. Accessed 14 Feb. 2023

3. A.V. Aho, M.S. Lam, R. Sethi, J.D. Ullman, Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools, 2nd

ed. (Pearson Education, 2006)

4. G. Winskel, The Formal Semantics of Programming Languages (MIT Press, 1993)
5. G.D. Plotkin, A structural approach to operational semantics. Technical Report DAIMI FN-19,
Computer Science Department, Aarhus University, 1981. Repr. J. Log. Alg. Program. 60–61,
17–139 (2004)

6. J.E. Hopcroft, R. Motwani, J.D. Ullman, Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and

Computation, 3rd ed. (Pearson, 2006)

7. A.W. Appel, Modern Compiler Implementation in Java, 2nd ed. (Cambridge University Press,

2002). This text exists also for C and ML

Foundations

3

In this chapter, we will not be concerned with programming languages but with the
limits of the programs that we can write, asking whether there exist problems that no
program can solve. A motivation for this research is the question that we asked at the
end of Sect. 2.3: that is, is it possible to construct a static semantic analyser which
can verify constraints imposed by the programming language’s deﬁnition? We will
soon discover, however, that the answer to the question is rather more general. It is a
kind of absolute limit to what can (and cannot) be done with a computer. Although
the material in this chapter can appear abstract, our treatment is wholly elementary.

3.1 The Halting Problem

In Sect. 2.3, we asked if there exists a static semantic analyser able to determine
whether a program may generate a division by zero error during execution. Instead
of tackling this problem, we will examine a larger problem, one that is also more
interesting. We will ask whether there exists a static analyser able to discover whether
a program, when provided with certain input data, will loop.

A static analyser can be viewed as a program used as a subprogram of a compiler.
Let us, therefore, ﬁx a programming language, L , in which we will write programs.
We assume L to be sufﬁciently expressive to be possible to write in L the interpreter
for itself.1 Given a program, P, and an input x, we write P(x) to denote the result
of computing P on x. However, P might not terminate on x because of a loop
or of inﬁnite recursion. Writing P(x), therefore, we do not necessarily indicate a

1 Although this requirement seems strange at ﬁrst sight, this is true for any general-purpose pro-
gramming language, including rudimentary ones like assembly languages, or theoretical ones like
Turing machines (see the box on Sect. 3.4). We will discuss this requirement in Sect. 3.2.1.

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
M. Gabbrielli and S. Martini, Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms,
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34144-1_3

53

54

3 Foundations

computation that terminates. Without loss of generality, we can now reformulate the
question as:

Does there exist a program, H , that, taking as input a program P (in the language L ) and its
input data x, will terminate and print “yes” if P(x) terminates, and terminate and print “no”
if P(x) loops?

We emphasise that H has two inputs. It must always terminate (we do not want a
compiler that loops!) and it must work on every program, P, written in L and every
input x. We can then assume, again without loss of generality, that H is written in
the language L .

We now show our hand. We want to show that there exists no program H with
the behaviour we have just discussed. We will argue by contradiction, assuming we
can have such an H , and from this we will derive a contradiction. The reasoning
might seem a little contorted at ﬁrst sight but requires no advanced knowledge. The
argument, however, is subtle and elegant; the reader should read it more than once
and be sure of understanding the critical role of self application.

1. Let us assume, by contradiction, that we have a program H with the properties

stated above.

2. Using H , we can write a program K , with only one input (which will be another

program), with the following speciﬁcation:

The program K , given P as input, terminates printing “yes” if H (P, P) prints “no”; it
goes into a loop if H (P, P) prints “yes”.

Writing the program K , given that H is available, is simple. We read the input P,
call H as a subprogram, passing P as ﬁrst and second parameter. We wait until
H terminates (this will certainly happen, given H ’s speciﬁcation). If H (P, P)
terminates and prints “no” (we can assume that we can intercept this printing
and stop it from appearing on the output), K prints “yes”. If, on the other hand,
H (P, P) prints “yes”, then K (intercepts this printing and) goes into an inﬁnite
loop programmed for the purpose.
If we recall the speciﬁcation of H , we can summarise the semantics of K as:

(cid:2)

K (P) =

“yes”
does not terminate if P(P) does terminate.

if P(P) does not terminate,

(3.1)

At ﬁrst sight, the application of P to itself seems strange. But it is not unusual—P
will receive as input a string representing the text of P.2

2 If we had assumed that the input to P was a number, then pass to P the numeric value resulting
from reading as a number the coding of the characters in the text of P.

3.2 Undecidable Problems

55

3. Let us now execute K on its own text. That is, we focus on K (K ). What is its

behaviour? If we substitute K for P in (3.1), we obtain:

(cid:2)

K (P) =

“yes”
does not terminate if K (K ) does terminate.

if K (K ) does not terminate,

(3.2)

4. Now let us observe that (3.2) is absurd. It says that K (K ) terminates (printing
“yes”) when K (K ) fails to terminate and that it does not terminate when K (K )
terminates.

5. Where does this contradiction come from? Not from K itself, which, as we have
seen, is a simple program which uses H . The contradiction arises from having to
assume the existence of a program with the properties of H . Therefore, H cannot
exist.

We have therefore proved that there exists no decision procedure (in the language
L ) capable of checking whether any program in L terminates on an arbitrary input.
We use here decision procedure in the technical sense of a program that: (i) works
for arbitrary arguments; (ii) always terminates and (iii) determines (by responding
“yes” or “no”) those arguments which are solutions to the problem and those which
are not.

This result, one of fundamental importance in computing, is called the undecid-
ability of the halting problem. Many other interesting problems are undecidable in
the same way. We will discuss some of them in the next section after ﬁrst having
discussed the characteristics of L from which the result derives. We can thus tackle
the problem of the expressive power of programming languages.

3.2 Undecidable Problems

At ﬁrst sight, the result we obtained in the last section can appear fairly limited.
If we take a language different from L , perhaps the program H can exist without
generating a contradiction.

Upon reﬂection, though, we have not assumed much about L . We have used L
in an implicit way to deﬁne the program K , given H (that is, at Step 2 of the proof).
To be able truly to write K , the following conditions must be satisﬁed:

1. There must be some form of conditional available in L , so that the cases in the

deﬁnition of K can be distinguished;

2. It must be possible to deﬁne functions which do not terminate in L (we must

therefore have at our disposal some form of iteration or recursion).

At this level of detail, L is nothing special. What programming language does not
provide these constructs? If a language provides these constructs, it can be used in
place of L in the proof, showing that a program like H exists in no programming
language worth its salt.

56

3 Foundations

3.2.1 The Standard Model

There is another assumption we made on L , that to be able to express its own inter-
preter. This is not a big requirement. Any programming language with a conditional
statement and a general looping mechanism can be shown to be able to express its
own interpreter, provided that we understand its programs as executed on an abstract
machine with unbounded resources.3 This is a tacit assumption that is always made
in the programming language community, and that we call the standard model for
programming language execution.

It is clear that the standard model is a theoretical abstraction. No program
will (can!) ever be executed with unbounded resources. Our computers are ﬁnite
objects, and there are no truly inﬁnite computations in nature. The standard model is
to programming languages what movement without friction is to mechanics—a fun-
damental abstraction that makes possible affordable mathematics of the phenomena
being described. Under the assumption of the ﬁniteness of the executing machine
(hence: no standard model), if a program does not terminate, it must do so by cycling
through the same conﬁgurations. Therefore, non-termination could be in principle
be decided by a brute force analysis of all possible computations, looking for a cycle
through the same conﬁgurations. Observe that, since everything is ﬁnite, also input
data come from a ﬁnite set. If, instead, we assume the standard model of execution,
there could be inﬁnite computations that never cycle on the same conﬁgurations. A
simple example is the program

i =0;
w h i l e True {

i +=1;

}

which does not terminate and never cycle on the same conﬁgurations, provided there
are unbounded resources to store the increasingly large value for i. On a (real) ﬁnite
machine, of course that program will terminate, by exhaustion of the available storing
resources.

Once the standard model of execution is assumed, the undecidability of the halting
problem is not a contingent fact, related to any particular programming language,
nor is it the expression of our inability as programmers. On the contrary, it is a
limitation that is in some way absolute, linked to the intuitive concepts of program
(algorithm) and of programming language. It is a principle of nature, similar to the
conservation of energy or to the principles of thermodynamics. In nature, there exist
more problems and functions than there are programs that we can write. Among these
problems there are also signiﬁcant ones, the halting problem being one of them.

3 And with true unbounded arithmetic if the language expresses arithmetic data.

3.3 Formalisms for Computability

57

3.2.2 More Undecidable Problems

We will argue in Sect. 3.3 that the problems for which there exists a program for
their solution—the decidable problems—are only a tiny part of the set of all possible
problems. As with the halting problem, when we say that a problem is undecidable,
we mean that there exists no program such that: (i) it accepts arbitrary arguments;
(ii) it always terminates and (iii) it determines which arguments are solutions to
the problem and which are not. We will stray too far if we begin a proof of the
undecidability of any other important problems; the interested reader can consult
any good text on the theory of computability. We can however list some undecidable
problems without attempting to explain all the terms used or to undertake any proofs.

The following problems are undecidable:

• Determine whether a program computes a constant function;
• Determine whether two programs compute the same function;
• Determine whether a program terminates for every input;
• Determine whether a program diverges for every input;
• Determine whether a program, given an input, will produce an error during its

execution;

• Determine whether a program will cause a type error during its execution (see the

box on Sect. 8.3.2).

These undecidability results tell us that completely general software tools which

automatically establish signiﬁcant properties of programs are impossible.

3.3 Formalisms for Computability

To make the discussion of L more precise, we need to ﬁx a programming language
and show that the reasoning of the previous section applies to it. Historically, the
ﬁrst language in which the impossibility of writing program H was shown was
the language of the Turing machine. The Turing machine language is a notation
which is, at ﬁrst sight, highly rudimentary. It was introduced in the 1930s by the
mathematician Alan M. Turing. It is summarised in the Turing Machines box. It is
at ﬁrst sight surprising that such a rudimentary formalism (there is no predeﬁned
arithmetic; everything turns on the positioning of a ﬁnite number of symbols on a
tape) could be good enough to express computations as sophisticated as those needed
to write K on the basis of H . More surprising is the fact that there exists a Turing
machine which acts as an interpreter for any other Turing machine. That is, a machine
which, once given as input on its own tape the (appropriately coded) description of
a machine M and an input x for it, executes the computation which M would do
on x. This interpreter is, to all intents and purposes, a (very simple) computer like
those that we know today (program and data in memory, and a fundamental cycle
that interprets program instructions).

58

Turing Machines

3 Foundations

A Turing machine is composed of an inﬁnite tape, divided into cells, each of which stores a single
symbol from a ﬁnite alphabet. A mobile head reads from and writes to the tape. At any time, the
head is positioned over a single cell. The machine is controlled by a ﬁnite-state controller. At each
step in the computation, the machine reads a symbol from the tape and, according to the state of
the machine and symbol that it has read, the controller decides which symbol to substitute for it on
the tape and if the head is to move to the left or to the right; the controller therefore enters another
state (remember, there is a ﬁnite number of states). The controller of a Turing machine can be seen
as its associated program.

A function is computable in a language L if there exists a program in L which
:
computes it. More precisely, the (partial—see the box on Sect. 1.2.2) function f
A → B is computable if there exists a program P with the following properties: for
each element a ∈ A, whenever P is executed on an input a, which we write P(a),
it terminates providing as an output f (a) if f (a) is deﬁned; the computation P(a)
does not terminate if f is undeﬁned at a.

We might expect that the functions computed by the Turing machines are fewer
than those computed by a sophisticated, modern programming language. However,
this is not the case. Since the 1930s, many formalisms have been introduced for
expressing algorithms (programs). Amongst these, the General Recursive Functions
of Church, Gödel, and Kleene (which make no reference to programming languages),
the lambda-calculus (which we will examine in Sect. 11.6), and then all programming
languages. Indeed, any of these formalisms and languages can be simulated by any
other of them. That is, it is possible in each of these formalisms to write an interpreter
for any of the others. From this, it follows that they are all equivalent in terms of the
functions they compute. They all compute exactly the same functions as the Turing
machine. This is frequently expressed by saying that all programming languages are
Turing complete (or Turing equivalent). The undecidability results, then, can also
be expressed by saying that there exist functions which cannot be computed (with a
Turing machine, or, by the above, in any programming language).

If all languages are equivalent with respect to the functions they compute, it is clear
that they are not equivalent as far as their ﬂexibility of use, pragmatics, abstraction
principles and so on, are concerned. And often this complex of properties is referred
to as the expressiveness of a language. While all these computability formalisms
provide a deﬁnite result about equivalence in terms of the functions that can be
expressed, those same formalisms do not say anything about the expressiveness of
languages. Indeed, expressiveness (as we deﬁned it) is a subject that has not been
treated in a sufﬁciently formal and theoretical way.

3.4 There Are More Functions Than Algorithms

59

3.4 There Are More Functions Than Algorithms

In Sect. 3.1, we gave a speciﬁc example of a uncomputable function. We can give
another proof that there exist functions which cannot be computed using a simple
cardinality argument (though, unlike in Sect. 3.1, we will not produce a speciﬁc
example). That is, we show that there are more functions than algorithms.

First of all, let us consider any formal system which allows us to express algorithms
and which, for simplicity we can assume to be a programming language, L . It is
easy enough to see that the set of all possible (ﬁnite) programs that can be written
in L is denumerable, that is, they can be put into one-one correspondence with the
natural numbers (which we denote by N). We can, in fact, ﬁrst consider the set P1
containing all programs of length one (which contain a single character), then the
set P2 containing all programs of length two, and so on. Every set, Pi , is ﬁnite and
can be ordered, for example lexicographically (ﬁrst all programs which begin with
a, then all those which begin with b, and so on by succeeding characters). It is clear
that by doing this, by taking into account the ordering produced by the subscript in
the sets P1, P2, . . . , and then doing the same with the internal indices in each set, we
can count (or enumerate) all possible programs and therefore put them into one-one
correspondence with the natural numbers. In more formal terms, the cardinality of
the set of all programs in L is equal to the cardinality of the natural numbers. Let
us now consider the set F containing all the functions N → {0, 1}. An important
theorem of Cantor states that this set is not denumerable—it has a cardinality strictly
greater than that of N. Given that every program computes a unique function, there
are functions in F for which there exist no program in L . Which is what we wanted
to show.

Let us see a direct proof of the fact that F is not denumerable. Let us assume
that F is denumerable, that is it is possible to write F = { f j } j∈N. Let us observe,
ﬁrst of all, that we can put F into one-one correspondence with the set B of all
the inﬁnite sequences of binary numbers. To each f j ∈ F , there corresponds the
sequence b j,1, b j,2, b j,3, . . . , where b j,i = f j (i), for i, j ∈ N. Therefore if F is
denumerable, so too is the set B. Since B is denumerable, we can enumerate its
elements one after the other, listing, for each element (for every sequence) its binary
digits. We can arrange such an enumeration in an inﬁnite square matrix:

b1,1, b1,2, b1,3,
b2,1, b2,2, b2,3,
b3,1, b3,2, b3,3,
...

. . .
. . .
. . .

where row j contains the sequence for the jth function. Writing b for the comple-
ment of the binary number b, let us now consider the sequence of binary numbers
b1,1, b2,2, b3,3, . . . . This sequence (since it is an inﬁnite sequence of binary num-
bers) is certainly an element of B. However it does not appear in our matrix (and
therefore does not appear in our enumeration) for the reason that each line of the
matrix differs in at at least one digit from the sequence. Indeed, take the generic

60

Church’s Thesis

3 Foundations

The proofs of equivalence of the various programming languages (and between the various com-
putability formalisms) are genuine theorems. Given two languages L and L (cid:4), write ﬁrst in L the
interpreter for L (cid:4) and then write in L (cid:4) the interpreter for L . At this point L and L (cid:4) are known
to be equivalent. A proof of this type has been effectively given for all existing languages, so they
are therefore provably equivalent. This argument leaves open the door to the possibility that sooner
or later someone will ﬁnd an intuitively computable function for which no program may be given
in any existing programming language. All equivalence results proved over more than 80 years,
however, amount to convincing evidence that this is impossible. In the mid-1930s, Alonzo Church
proposed a principle (which since then has become known as Church’s, or the Church-Turing, The-
sis) that states this impossibility. We can formulate Church’s Thesis as: every intuitively computable
function is computed by a Turing machine.

In contrast to the equivalence results, Church’s Thesis is not a theorem because it refers to
a concept (that of intuitive computability) that is not amenable to formal reasoning. It is, rather, a
philosophical principle that the computer science community assumes with considerable strength to
be true, and that so far has not been discredited even by new computational paradigms, for example,
quantum computing.

line j. On the diagonal, line j has the element b j, j , while, by construction, the new
sequence has the element b j, j in position j.

We have therefore a contradiction: we had assumed that F = { f j } j∈N was an
enumeration of all functions (that is, of all sequences), while we have constructed
a function (a sequence) which did not belong to the enumeration. Therefore the
cardinality of F is strictly greater than that of N.

It can be shown that F has the cardinality of the real numbers. This fact indicates
that the set of programs (which is denumerable) is much smaller than that of all
possible functions, and therefore of all possible problems.

3.5 Summary

The phenomenon of computation on which Computer Science is founded has its
roots in the theory of computability which studies the formalisms in which one can
express algorithms and their limits. The chapter has only presented the main result of
this theory. This is a fact of the greatest importance, one that every computer scientist
should know. The principal concepts which were introduced are:

• Undecidability: there exist many important properties of programs which cannot
be determined in a mechanical fashion by an algorithm; amongst these is the halting
problem.

3.7 Exercises

61

• Computability: a function is computable when there exists a program which com-
putes it. The undecidability of the halting problem assures us that there exist
functions which are not computable.

• Partiality: the functions expressed by a program can be undeﬁned on some argu-
ments, corresponding to those data for which the program will fail to terminate.
• Turing Completeness: every general-purpose programming language computes the

same set of functions as those computed by a Turing Machine.

3.6 Bibliographical Notes

The original undecidability result was presented in the paper by Turing [1], which
should be necessary reading for every computer scientist with an interest in theory.
This chapter informally present just one tiny bit of computability theory. For more
in-depth account, we recommend [2], which we cited in Chap. 2, and the classic
[3] which after more than 50 years continues to be one of the most authoritative
references.

3.7 Exercises

1. Proof that the restricted halting problem is undecidable. That is, determine
whether a program terminates when it is applied to itself. (Suggestion: if the
problem were decidable, the program which decides it would have to have the
same property as program K , which can be derived by contradiction in the usual
fashion.)

2. Show that the problem of verifying whether a program computes a constant func-
tion is undecidable. Hint: given a generic program P, consider the program Q P ,
with a single input, speciﬁed as follows:

(cid:2)

Q P (y) =

1
does not terminate otherwise.

if P(P) terminates,

(i) Write the program Q P ;
(ii) assume now that P is a program such that P(P) terminates. What is the

behaviour of Q P , as y varies?

(iii) what is, on other hand, the behaviour of Q P , as y varies, if P(P) does not

terminate?

(iv) from (ii) and (iii), it can be obtained that Q P computes the constant function

one if and only if P(P) terminates;

(v) if it were now decidable whether a program computes a constant function,
the restricted halting problem would also be decidable, given that the trans-
formation that, given P, constructs Q P is completely general.

62

References

3 Foundations

1. A. Turing, On computable numbers, with an application to the Entscheidungsproblem. Proc.

London Math. Soc. 42, 230–365 (1936). A Correction, ibidem 43, 544–546 (1937)

2. J.E. Hopcroft, R. Motwani, J.D. Ullman, Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and

Computation, 3rd ed. (Pearson, 2006)

3. H. Rogers, Theory of Recursive Functions and Effective Computability (McGraw Hill, reprinted

by MIT Press, 1967)
