# Fuente
- archivo: 083-105.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/(Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science) Maurizio Gabbrielli_ Simone Martini - Programming Languages_ Principles and Paradigms (2nd Edition)-Springer (2023)/083-105.pdf
- extraido: 2026-03-26T16:14:16

# Contenido

Names and the Environment

4

The evolution of programming languages can be seen in large measure as a process
which has led, by means of appropriate abstraction mechanisms, to the deﬁnition of
formalisms that are increasingly distant from the physical machine. In this context,
names play a fundamental role. A name, indeed, is nothing more than a (possibly
meaningful) sequence of characters used to represent some other thing. They allow
the abstraction either of aspects of data, for example using a name to denote a location
in memory, or aspects of control, for example representing a set of commands with
a name. The correct handling of names requires precise semantic rules as well as
adequate implementation mechanisms.

In this chapter, we will analyse these rules. We will, in particular, look at the
concept of environment and the constructs used to organise it. We will also look at
visibility (or scope) rules. We leave until the next chapter treatment of the imple-
mentation of these concepts. Let us immediately observe how, in languages with
procedures, in order to deﬁne precisely the concept of environment one needs other
concepts, related to parameter passing. We will see these concepts in Chap. 7. In
the case of object-oriented languages, ﬁnally, there are other speciﬁc visibility rules
which we will consider in Chap. 10.

4.1 Names and Denotable Objects

When we declare a new variable in a program:

int fie ;

or we deﬁne a new function:

int foo ( ){
fie = 1;

}

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
M. Gabbrielli and S. Martini, Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms,
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34144-1_4

63

64

4 Names and the Environment

we introduce new names, such as fie and foo to represent an object (a variable
and a function in our example). The character sequence fie can be used every time
that we want to refer to the new variable, just as the character sequence foo allows
us to call the function that assigns to fie the value 1.

A name is therefore a sequence of characters used to represent, or denote, another

object.1

In most languages, names are identiﬁers, that is alphanumeric tokens. However,
other symbols can also be names. For example, + and - are names that may denote
(primitive) operations.

Even though it might seem obvious, it is important to emphasize that a name and
the object it denotes are not the same thing. A name, indeed, is just a character string,
while its denotation can be a complex object such as a variable, a function, a type,
and so on. And in fact, a single object can have more than one name (in this case,
one speaks of aliasing), while a single name can denote different objects at different
times. Therefore, when we say “the variable fie” or “the function foo”, it should
be remembered that these are abbreviations for “the variable with the name fie”
and “the function with the name foo”. More generally, in programming practice,
when a name is used, it is almost always meant to refer to the object that it denotes.
The use of names implements a ﬁrst, elementary, data abstraction mechanism.
For example, when, in an imperative language, we deﬁne a name using a variable,
we are introducing a symbolic identiﬁer for a memory location; therefore we are
abstracting from the low-level details of memory addresses. If, then, we use the
assignment command:

fie = 2;

the value 2 will be stored in the location reserved for the variable named fie. At
the programming level, the use of the name avoids the need to bother with whatever
this location is. The correspondence between name and memory location must be
guaranteed by the implementation. We will use the term environment to refer to that
part of the implementation responsible for the associations between names and the
objects that they denote. We will see better in Sect. 6.2.1 what exactly constitutes a
variable and how it can be associated with values.

Names are fundamental even for implementing a form of control abstraction.
A procedure2 is a name associated with a set of commands, together with certain
visibility rules which make available to the programmer its sole interface (which is
composed of the procedure’s name and possibly some parameters). We will see the
speciﬁcs of control abstraction in Chap. 7.

1 Here and in the rest of this chapter, “object” is intended in a wide sense, with no reference to
technical terms used in the area of object-oriented languages.
2 Here and elsewhere, we will use the generic term “procedure” for procedures as well as functions,
methods and subprograms. See also Sect. 7.1.

4.1 Names and Denotable Objects

65

4.1.1 Denotable Objects

The objects to which a name can be given are called denotable objects. Even if there
are considerable differences between programming languages, the following is a
non-exhaustive list of possible denotable objects:

(cid:129) Objects whose names are deﬁned by the user: variables, formal parameters, pro-
cedures (in the broad sense), user-deﬁned types, labels, modules, user-deﬁned
constants, exceptions.

(cid:129) Objects whose names are deﬁned by the programming language: primitive types,

primitive operations, predeﬁned constants.

The association (or binding) between a name and an object it denotes can therefore
be created at different times. Some names are associated with objects during the
design of a language, while other associations are introduced only when a program
is executed. Considering the entire process ranging from a programming language’s
deﬁnition to the execution of a speciﬁc program, we can identify the following phases
for the creation of bindings of names to objects:

Design of language

In this phase, bindings between primitive constants, types
and operations of the language are deﬁned (for example, + indicates addition, and
int denotes the type of integers, etc.).

Program writing Given that the programmer chooses names when they write a
program, we can consider this phase as one with the partial deﬁnition of some
bindings, later to be completed. The binding of an identiﬁer to a variable, for
example, is deﬁned in the program but is effectively created only when the space
for the variable is allocated in memory.

Compile time The compiler, translating the constructs of the high-level language
into machine code, allocates memory space for some of the data structures that
can be statically processed. For example, this is the case for the global variables of
a program. The connection between a variable’s identiﬁer and the corresponding
memory location is formed at this time.

Runtime This term denotes the entire period of time between starting and termi-
nation of a program. All the associations that have not previously been created
must be formed at runtime. This is the case, for example, for bindings of variable
identiﬁers to memory locations for the local variables in a recursive procedure,
or for pointer variables whose memory is allocated dynamically.

In the previous description we have ignored other important phases, such as link-
ing and loading in which other bindings (for example for external names referring
to objects in other modules). In practice, however, two principle phases are distin-
guished using the terms “static” and “dynamic”. The term “static” is used to refer
to everything that happens prior to execution, while “dynamic” refers to everything
that happens during execution. Thus, for example, static memory management is per-

66

4 Names and the Environment

formed by the compiler, while dynamic management is performed by appropriate
operations executed by the abstract machine at runtime.

4.2 Environments and Blocks

Not all associations between names and denotable objects are ﬁxed once and for
all at the start of program execution. Many can vary during execution. To be able
to understand how these associations behave, we need to introduce the concept of
environment.

Deﬁnition 4.1 (Environment) The set of associations between names and denotable
objects which exist at runtime at a speciﬁc point in the program and at a speciﬁc time
during execution, is called the (referencing) environment.

Usually, when we speak of environments, we refer only to associations that are not
established by the language deﬁnition. The environment is therefore that component
of the abstract machine which, for every name introduced by the programmer and at
every point in the program, allows the determination of what the correct association
is. Note that the environment does not exist at the level of the physical machine. The
presence of the environment constitutes one of the principle characteristics of high-
level languages which must be simulated in a suitable fashion by each implementation
of the language.

A declaration is a construct that allows the introduction of an association in the

environment. High-level languages often have explicit declarations, such as:

int x ;
int f (){

r e t u r n 0;

}
type T = int ;

(the ﬁrst is a declaration of a variable, the second of a function named f, the third
is declaration of a new type, T, which coincides with type int). Some languages
allow implicit declarations which introduce an association in the environment for a
name when it is ﬁrst used. The denoted object’s type is deduced from the context in
which the name is used for the ﬁrst time (or sometimes from the syntactic form of
the name).

As we will see in detail below, there are various degrees of freedom in associations
between names and denotable objects. First of all, a single name can denote different
objects in different parts of the program. Consider, for example, the code of Fig. 4.1.
The outermost name fie denotes an integer variable, while the inner one is of type
character.

It is also possible that a single object is denoted by more than one name in
different environments. For example, if we pass a variable by reference to a pro-
cedure, the variable is accessible using its name in the calling program and by means

4.2 Environments and Blocks

67

Fig. 4.1 A name denoting
different objects

of the name of the formal parameter in the body of the procedure (see Sect. 7.1.2).
Alternatively, we can use pointers to create data structures in which the same object
is then accessible using different names.

While different names for the same object are used in different environments, no
particular problems arise. The situation is more complicated when a single object is
visible using different names in the same environment. This is called aliasing and the
different names for the same object called aliases. If the name of a variable passed
by reference to a procedure is also visible inside the same procedure, we have a
situation of aliasing. Other aliasing situations can easily occur using pointers. If X
and Y are variables of pointer type, the assignment X = Y allows us to access the
same location using both X and Y.

Let us consider, for example, the following fragment of C program where, as we
will do in the future, we assume that write(Z) is a procedure which allows us to
print the value of the integer variable Z:

int * X , * Y ;
X = ( int *) m a l l o c ( s i z e o f ( int ));

// X , Y p o i n t e r s to i n t e g e r s

* X = 5;
Y = X ;
* Y =10;
w r i t e (* X );

// a l l o c a t e h e a p m e m o r y
// * d e r e f e r e n c e
// Y p o i n t s to the s a m e o b j e c t as X

The names X and Y denote two different variables, which, however, after the execution
of the assignment command X = Y, allow to access the same memory location
(therefore, the write command will output 10).

It is, ﬁnally, possible that a single name, in a single textual region of the program,
can denote different objects according to the execution ﬂow of the program. The
situation is more common than it might seem at ﬁrst sight. It is the case, for example,
for a recursive procedure declaring a local name. Other cases of this type, which
are more subtle, will be discussed below in this chapter when will discuss dynamic
scope (Sect. 4.3.2).

4.2.1 Blocks

Almost all important programming languages today permit the use of blocks, a
structuring method for programs introduced by Algol 60. Block structuring is fun-
damental to the organisation of the environment.

68

4 Names and the Environment

Deﬁnition 4.2 (Block) A block is a textual region of the program, identiﬁed by a
start sign and an end sign, which can contain declarations local to that region (that
is, which appear within the region).

The start—and end—block signs vary according to the programming language:
begin ... end for languages in the Algol family, braces {...} for C and Java,
round brackets (...) for Lisp and its dialects, let ... in ... end in ML, a
simple positive indentation in Python,3 etc. Moreover, the exact deﬁnition of block
in the speciﬁc programming language can differ slightly from the one given above. In
some cases, for example, one talks about block only when there are local declarations.
Often, though, blocks have another important function, that of grouping a series of
commands into a syntactic entity which can be considered as a single (composite)
command. These distinctions, however, are not relevant as far as we are concerned.
We will, therefore, use the deﬁnition given above and we distinguish two cases:

Block associated with a procedure This is a block associated with declarations
local to a procedure. It corresponds textually to the body of the procedure itself,
extended with the declarations of formal parameters.

In-line block This is a block which does not correspond to a declaration of pro-
cedure and which can appear (in general) in any position where a command can
appear.

4.2.2 Types of Environment

The environment changes during the execution of a program. However, the changes
occur generally at two precise times: on the entry and exit of a block. The block
can therefore be considered as the construct of least granularity to which a constant
environment can be associated.4

A block’s environment, meaning by this terminology the environment existing
when the block is executed, is initially composed of associations between names
declared locally to the block itself. In most block-based languages, blocks can be
nested; that is, the deﬁnition of one block can be wholly included in that of another.
An example of nested in-line blocks is shown in Fig. 4.1. The overlapping of blocks
so the last open block is not the ﬁrst block to be closed is never permitted. In other
words a sequence of commands of the following kind is not permitted:

open block A ;

open block B ;

c l o s e b l o c k A ;

c l o s e b l o c k B ;

3 But observe that a Python’s indented sequence of program lines (called a “suite” in Python’s docu-
mentation) does not necessarily introduces a local environment. Local environments are introduced
by those suites that form a module, a function body, and a class deﬁnition.
4 Declarations in the block are evaluated when the block is entered and are visible throughout the
block. There exist many exceptions to this rule, some of which will be discussed below.

4.2 Environments and Blocks

69

Different languages vary, then, in the type of nesting they permit. In C, for exam-
ple, blocks associated with procedures cannot be nested inside each other (that is,
there cannot be procedure declarations inside other procedures), while in most other
languages this restriction is not present.5

Block nesting is an important mechanism for structuring the environment. Suitable

mechanisms allow declarations local to a block to be visible in nested blocks.

Remaining informal for the time being, we say that a name local to a block is
visible in another block when the association created for that name is present in the
environment of the second block. Those mechanisms of the language which regulate
how and when a name is visible are called visibility rules. The canonical visibility
rule for languages with blocks is well known:

A name local to a block is visible in that block and in all blocks nested within it, unless there
is a new deﬁnition of the same name in those nested blocks. In this case, in the block which
contains the redeﬁnition, the new declaration hides the previous one.6

In the case in which there is a redeﬁnition, the visibility rule establishes that only
the last name declared will be visible in the internal block, while in the exterior one
there is a visibility hole. The association for the name declared in the external block
will be, in fact, deactivated for the whole of the interior block (containing the new
declaration) and will be reactivated on exit from the inner block. Note that there is
no visibility from the outside inwards—an association introduced in a block is not
active (or, the name that it deﬁnes is not visible) in any block which is exterior to
the block where the association is introduced. Analogously, if we have two blocks
at the same nesting level (and then neither of the two contains the other), a name
introduced locally in one block is not visible in the other.

The deﬁnition just given, although apparently precise, is insufﬁciently so to estab-
lish what the environment will be at a generic point in a program. We will assume
this rule for the rest of this section; next section will restate with more precision the
visibility rules. We can identify three components of an environment, as stated in the
following deﬁnition.

Deﬁnition 4.3 (Type of environment) The environment associated with a block is
formed of the following components:

Local environment This is composed of the set of associations for names declared
locally to the block. In the case in which the block is for a procedure, the local
environment contains also the associations for the formal parameters. Indeed, as

5 The reasons for this restriction in C will be made clear in the next chapter, after have seen the
techniques for implementing scope rules.
6 Let us note from the onset that there may be exceptions to this general rule. One of the most
relevant is the visibility of names local to a class deﬁnition in Python, which does not include its
nested blocks.

70

4 Names and the Environment

Fig. 4.2 Nested blocks with
different environments

far as the environment is concerned, formal parameters act as locally declared
names.

Non-local environment This is the environment formed from the associations for
names which are visible from inside a block but which have not been declared
locally.

Global environment

Finally, this is the environment formed from associations

for names which can be used in all blocks of the program.

The environment local to a block can be determined by considering only the
declarations present in the block. We must look outside the block to deﬁne the non-
local environment. The global environment is part of the non-local environment.
Names introduced in the local environment can be themselves present in the non-local
environment. In such cases, the innermost (local) declaration hides the outermost one.
The visibility rules specify how names declared in external blocks are visible in
internal ones. In some cases, it is possible to import names from other, separately
deﬁned modules. The associations for these names may be part of the global envi-
ronment, or the local environment, according to the language-speciﬁc rules.

We will now consider the example in Fig. 4.2, where, for ease of reference, we
assume that the blocks can be labelled (as before, we assume also that write(x)
allows us to print an integer value). The labels behave as comments as far as the
execution is concerned.

Let us assume that block A is the outermost. It corresponds to the main program.
The declaration of the variable a introduces an association in the global environment.
Inside block B two variables are declared locally (b and c). The environment for
B is therefore formed of the local environment, containing the association for the two
names (b and c) and from the global environment containing the association for a.
Inside block C, two local variables (c and d) are declared. The environment of
C is therefore formed from the local environment, which contains the association

4.2 Environments and Blocks

71

for the two names (c and d) and from the non-local environment containing the
same global environment as above, and also the association for the name b which is
inherited from the environment of block B. Note that the local declaration of c in
block C hides the declaration of c present in block B. The print command present in
block C will therefore print the value 6.

In block D, ﬁnally, we have a local environment containing the association for the
local name e, the usual global environment and the non-local environment, which,
in addition to the association for a, contains the association for the names b and c
introduced in block B. Given that variable c has not been internally re-declared, in
this case, therefore, the variable declared in block B remains visible and the value
printed will be 5. Note that the association for the name d does not appear in the
environment non-local to D, given that this name is introduced in an exterior block
which does not contain D. The visibility rules, indeed, allows only the inheritance of
names declared in exterior blocks from interior ones and not vice versa.

4.2.3 Operations on Environments

As we have seen, changes in the environment are produced at entry into and exit
from a block. In more detail, during the execution of the program, when a new block
is entered, the following modiﬁcations are made to the environment:

1. Associations between locally declared names and the corresponding denotable

objects are created.

2. Associations with names declared external to and redeﬁned inside the block are

deactivated.

Also when the block is exited, the environment is modiﬁed as follows:

1. The associations for names declared locally to the block and the objects they

denote are destroyed.

2. The associations are reactivated between names that existed external to the block

and which were redeﬁned inside it.

More generally, we can identify the following operations on names and on the

environment:

Creation of associations between names and denoted object (naming) This is
the elaboration of a declaration (or the connection of a formal to an actual param-
eter) when a new block containing local or parameter declarations is entered.
Reference to a denoted object via its name This is the use of the name (in an
expression, in a command, or in any other context). The name is used to access
the denoted object.

Deactivation of association between name and denoted object This happens
when entering a block in which a new association for that name is created locally.

72

4 Names and the Environment

The old association is not destroyed but remains (inactive) in the environment. It
will be usable again when the block containing the new association is left.

Reactivation of an association between name and denoted object When leav-
ing block in which a new association for that name is created locally, reactivation
occurs. The previous association, which was deactivated on entry to the block,
can now be used.

Destruction of an association between name and denoted object (unnaming)

This is performed on local associations when the block in which these associa-
tions were created is exited. The association is removed from environment and
can no longer be used.

Let us explicitly note, therefore, that any environment contains both active and
inactive associations (they correspond to declarations that have been hidden by the
effects of the visibility rules). As far as denotable objects are concerned, the following
operations are permitted:

Creation of a denotable object This operation is performed while allocating the
storage necessary to contain the object. Sometimes, creation includes also the
initialisation of the object.

Access to a denotable object Using the name, and hence the environment, we
can access the denotable object and thus access its value (for example, to read the
content of a variable). The rules deﬁning the environment should be enough to
make the association between a name and the object to which it refers one-to-one
(at a given point in the program and during a given execution).

Modiﬁcation of a denotable object

It may be possible to access and modify a
denotable object via a name (for example, by assigning a value to a variable), if
the object is modiﬁable.

Destruction of a denotable object An object can be destroyed by reallocating the

memory reserved for it.

In many languages, the operations of creating an association between the name
and a denotable object and that of creating a denotable object take place at the same
time. This is the case, for example, in a declaration of the form:

int x ;

This declaration introduces into the environment a new association between the name
x and an integer variable. At the same time, it allocates the memory for the variable.
Yet, this is not always the case and, in general, it is not stated that the lifetime of a
denotable object, that is the time between the creation of the object and its destruction,
coincides with the lifetime of the association between a name and that object. Indeed,
a denotable object can have a lifetime that is greater than the association between a
name and the object itself, as the case in which a variable is passed to a procedure
by reference. The association between the formal parameter and associated variable
has a lifetime less than that of the variable itself. More generally, a situation of this

4.3 Scope Rules

73

type occurs when a temporary name (for example, one local to a block) is introduced
for an object which already has a name.

Note that the situation we are considering is not that shown in Fig. 4.2. In this
case, indeed, the internal declaration of the variable, c, does not introduce a new
name for an existing object, but introduces a new object (a new variable).

Even if, at ﬁrst sight, this seems odd, it can also be the case that the lifetime of
an association between name and a denoted object is greater than that of the object
itself. More precisely, it can be the case that a name allows access to an object
which no longer exists. Such an anomalous situation can occur, for example, if we
call by reference an existing object and then deallocate the memory for it before the
procedure terminates. The formal parameter to the procedure, in this case, will denote
an object which no longer exists. A situation of this type, in which it is possible to
access an object whose memory has been reallocated, is called a dangling reference
and is a symptom of an error. We will return to the problem of dangling references
in Chap. 8, where we will present some methods to handle them.

4.3 Scope Rules

We have seen how, on block entry and exit, the environment can change as a result
of the operations for the creation, destruction, activation and deactivation of asso-
ciations. These changes are reasonably clear for local environments, but are less
clear where the non-local environment is concerned. The visibility rules stated in
the previous section indeed lend themselves to at least two different interpretations.
Consider for example the following program fragment:

A :{ int x = 0;

void fie (){
x = 1;

}

B :{ int x ;
fie ();

}

w r i t e ( x );

}

Which value will be printed? To answer this question, the fundamental problem
is knowing which declaration of x should be used for the non-local occurrence of x
in fie’s body. On the one hand, we can reasonably think that the value 1 is printed,
given that procedure fie is deﬁned in block A and, therefore, the x which appears
in the body of the procedure could be that deﬁned on the ﬁrst line of A. On the
other hand, however, we can also reason as follows. When we call procedure fie,
we are in block B, so the x in the body of the procedure is the one declared locally
to block B. This local variable is now no longer visible when we exit block B, so

74

4 Names and the Environment

write(x) refers to the variable x declared and initialised to 0 in block A and never
again modiﬁed. Therefore the procedure prints the value 0.

Before the reader tries to ﬁnd possible tricks in the above reasoning, we must
assert that they are both legitimate. The result of the program fragment depends on
the scope rule being used. The visibility rule that we have stated above establishes
that a “name local to a block is visible in that block and in all blocks nested within it,”
but does not specify whether this concept of nesting must be considered in a static
(that is based on the text of the program) or dynamic (that is based on the ﬂow of
execution) fashion. When the visibility rules, also called scope rules, depend only on
the syntactic structure of the program, we will talk of a language with static or lexical
scope. When it is inﬂuenced also by the control ﬂow at runtime, we are dealing with
a language with dynamic scope. In the following sections we will analyse these two
concepts in detail.

4.3.1 Static Scope

In a language with static (or lexical) scope, the environment in force at any point of the
program and at any point during execution depends uniquely on the syntactic structure
of the program itself. Such an environment can then be determined completely by
the compiler, hence the term “static”.

Obviously there can be different static scope rules. One of the simplest, for exam-
ple, is that of the ﬁrst version of the Basic language which allowed a single global
environment in which it was possible to use only a small number of names (some
hundreds) and where declarations were not used.

Much more interesting is the static scope rule that is used in those block-structured
languages that allow nesting. This was introduced in Algol 60 and is retained, with
few modiﬁcations, by most modern languages, including Ada, Pascal, Java, and
Python. The rule can be deﬁned as follows:

Deﬁnition 4.4 (Static Scope) The static scope rule, or the rule of nearest nested
scope, is deﬁned by the following three rules:

(i) The declarations local to a block deﬁne the local environment of that block. The
local declarations of a block include only those present in the block (usually
at the start of the block itself) and not those possibly present in blocks nested
inside the block in question.

(ii) If a name is used inside a block, the valid association for this name is the one
present in the environment local to the block, if it exists. If no association for the
name exists in the environment local to the block, the associations existing in
the environment local to the block immediately containing the starting block are
considered. If the association is found in this block, it is the valid one, otherwise
the search continues with the blocks containing the one with which we started,
from the nearest to the furthest. If, during this search, the outermost block is
reached and it contains no association for the name, then this association must

4.3 Scope Rules

Fig. 4.3 An example of
static scope

75

be looked up in the language’s predeﬁned environment. If no association exists
here, there is an error.

(iii) A block can be assigned a name, in which case the name is part of the local envi-
ronment of the block which immediately includes the block to which the name
has been assigned. This is the case also for blocks associated with procedures.

This deﬁnition corresponds to the informal visibility rules that we have already

discussed, suitably completed by a static interpretation of the concept of nesting.

Among the various details of the rule, note (point (iii)) that the deﬁnition of a
procedure introduces an association for the name of the procedure in the environ-
ment local to the block containing the declaration (therefore, because of nesting, the
association is also visible in body of the procedure, allowing the deﬁnition of recur-
sive procedures). The procedure’s formal parameters, however, are present only in
the environment local to the procedure and are not visible in the environment which
contains the procedure’s declaration.

In a language with static scope, we will call scope of a declaration that portion of

the program in which the declaration is visible according to Deﬁnition 4.4.

We conclude our analysis of static scope by discussing the example in Fig. 4.3.
The ﬁrst and third occurrences of write print the value 4, while the second prints
the value 0. Note that the formal parameter, n, is not visible outside of the body of
the procedure.

Static scope allows the determination of all the environments present in a program
simply by reading its text. This has two important consequences of a positive nature.
First, the programmer has a better understanding of the program, as far as they can
connect every occurrence of a name to its correct declaration by observing the textual
structure of the program and without having to simulate its execution. Moreover, this
connection can also be made by the compiler which can therefore determine each
and every use of a name. This makes it possible, at compile time, to perform a great
number of correctness tests using the information contained in types; it can also
perform considerable number of code optimisations. For example, if the compiler
knows (using declarations) that the variable x which occurs in a block is an integer
variable, it will signal an error in the case in which a character is assigned to this
variable. Similarly, if the compiler knows that the constant fie is associated with

76

4 Names and the Environment

Fig. 4.4 An example of
dynamic scope

the value 10, it can substitute the value 10 for every reference to fie, so avoiding
having to arrange for this operation to be performed at runtime. If, instead, the correct
declaration for x and for fie can be determined only at execution time, it is clear
that these checks and this optimisation are not possible at compilation time.

Note that, even with the static scope rules, the compiler cannot know in general
which memory location will be assigned to the variable with name x nor what its
value might be, given that this information depends on the execution of the program.
When using the static scope rule, however, the compiler is in possession of some
important information about the storage of variables (in particular it knows the offsets
relative to a ﬁxed position, as we will see in detail in the next chapter), that it uses
to compile efﬁcient accesses to variables. As we will see, this information is not
available using dynamic scope, which, therefore, leads to less efﬁcient execution.
For these reasons, most current languages use some form of static scope.

4.3.2 Dynamic Scope

Dynamic scope was introduced in some languages, such as, for example, APL,
Lisp (some versions), SNOBOL and Perl, mainly to simplify runtime environment
management. Static scope imposes a fairly complicated runtime regime because the
various non-local environments are involved in a way that does not reﬂect the normal
ﬂow of activation and deactivation of blocks. Let us consider the fragment of code
in Fig. 4.4 and follow its execution. First, the outermost block is entered and the
association between the name x and the constant 0 is created, as well as that between
the names fie, foo and associated procedures. Next the call to the procedure foo is
executed and control enters the block associated with the procedure. In this block, the
link between the name x and the constant 1 is created; then the call to procedure fie
is executed which causes entry to a new block (the one for the latter procedure). It is
at this point that the command write(x) is executed and given that x is not a name
local to the block introduced by the procedure fie, the association for the name x
must be looked up in outer blocks. According to the rules of static scope, as presented
in the last section, the ﬁrst external block in which to look for the association for x is
not the last activated block (i.e., the one for foo, in our example). The external block
depends on the structure of the program, not on its execution. In this case, then, the
correct association for the name x used by fie is the one located in the ﬁrst block,

4.3 Scope Rules

77

so that the value 0 is printed. The block for foo, even if it contains a declaration for
x and is still active, is not considered.

Generalising from the previous example, we can say that, under static scope,
the sequence of blocks that must be considered to resolve references to non-local
names is different from the sequence of blocks that is opened and exited during
the program’s normal ﬂow of control. The opening and closing can be handled in a
natural manner using the LIFO (Last In First Out) discipline, that is using a stack.
The sequence of blocks that need examining to implement static scope depends on
the syntactic structure of the program and being able to handle it correctly at runtime
depends upon the use of additional data structures, as we will see in detail in the next
chapter.

To simplify the management of the runtime environment some languages use then
the dynamic scope rule. This rule determines the associations between names and
denoted objects using the backward execution of the program. In such languages,
resolving non-local names requires only a stack dedicated to handling blocks at
runtime. In our example, this means that, when the command write(x) is executed,
the association for the name and x is sought in the second block (relative to procedure
foo), rather than in the ﬁrst block, because this is the last block, different from the
current one, in which we entered and from which we have not yet exited. Given that
in the second block, we ﬁnd the declaration const x = 1, in the case of dynamic
scope the preceding program prints the value 1.

The dynamic scope rule, also called the rule of the most recent association, can

be deﬁned as follows.

Deﬁnition 4.5 (Dynamic Scope) According to the rule of dynamic scope, the valid
association for a name X, at any point P of a program, is the most recent (in the
temporal sense) association created for X which is still active when the control ﬂow
arrives at P.

Let us observe that this rule does not contradict the informal visibility rule that we
stated in Sect. 4.2.2. A moment’s reﬂection shows, indeed, that the dynamic scope
rule expresses the same visibility rule when the concept of block nesting is understood
in a dynamic sense.

Let us again note how the difference between static and dynamic scope enters only
into the determination of the environment which is both non-local and non-global.
For the local and global environment, the two rules coincide.

Let us conclude by discussing the example in Fig. 4.5. In a language with dynamic
scope, the code prints the value 1 because when the command write(x) is exe-
cuted, the last association created for x which is still active associates x with 1. The
association which associates x to 2, even if it is the most recent one to be created, is
no longer active when procedure fie is executed and is therefore not considered.

Note that dynamic scope allows the modiﬁcation of the behaviour of a proce-
dure without using explicit parameters but only by redeﬁning some of the non-
local variables used. To explain this point, assume that we have a procedure
visualise(text) which can visualise text in various colours, according to the

78

4 Names and the Environment

Fig. 4.5 Another example of
dynamic scope

value of the non-local variable colour. If we assume that in the majority of cases,
the procedure visualises text in black, it is natural to assume that we do not wish to
introduce another parameter to the procedure in order to determine the colour. If the
language uses dynamic scope, in the case in which the procedure has to visualise a
text in red, it will be enough to introduce the declaration for the variable colour
before the call of the procedure. We can therefore write:

...
{ var c o l o u r = red ;
v i s u a l i s e ( head );

}

Then the call to procedure visualise now will use the colour red, because of the effect
of dynamic scope. This ﬂexibility of dynamic scope may appear advantageous, at
a ﬁrst sight. However, it often makes programs more difﬁcult to read, given that
the same procedure call, in conditions differing by only one non-local variable can
produce different results. If the variable (colour in our example) is modiﬁed in
an area of program that is distant from the procedure call, understanding what has
happened will probably turn out to be difﬁcult.

For this reason, as well as for runtime efﬁciency, dynamic scope remains little
used in modern general-purpose languages, which instead use the static scope rule.

4.3.3 Some Scope Problems

The visibility and scope rules still leave several ambiguities, which each language
resolves in its own way. We will touch here on a couple of them, as examples of the
subtleties that a language designer (and any informed user) must tackle.

The ﬁrst issue is the portion of block in which a certain name is visible. In Java
and C, the scope of a declaration starts at the point of declaration and ends at the end
of the block of declaration. This means that in the following C code (same happens
in Java in a similar situation)

int val = 1 0 0 0
void f (){

int foo = val ;
int val = 1 0 0 ;

}

4.3 Scope Rules

79

in the body of f there are two different names val. The ﬁrst line of the body assigns
the value of the global name val (1000) to the local foo. The second line of the
body introduces a new name val, local to f, with value 100, whose scope extends
until the end of the body of f. In Python, which does not have explicit declarations,
a new name is introduced in a block whenever a name is used for the ﬁrst time at the
left of an assignment. However, in Python, the scope of a name is the whole block
in which it is introduced. Python’s analogue of the previous fragment would be

val = 1 0 0 0
def f ():

foo = val
val =100

The scope of the global val does not include the body of f, because a local val is
present there. The Python fragment above may be compiled (remember that Python’s
compilation is a simple affair, without any important static semantics check). But
any call to f would raise an exception for the violation of the rule of “deﬁne before
use”: any name must be assigned a value before it could be used in an expression.7
The name val assigned to foo is local to f, but it will get a value only after that
assignment.

Languages with explicit declarations insist that a name should be declared before
use. There are cases, however, where this constraint cannot be satisﬁed. A typical
example is given by mutually (or implicitly) recursive functions: a function f which
in its body calls g, whose body contains a call to f. No matter which of the two
functions is deﬁned ﬁrst, the rule “declaration before use” is violated. To overcome
this problem, in ANSI C one must use function declarations, that is language con-
structs that introduce the function’s name, return type, and parameters (if any), but
not the body.8 The following is a correct ANSI C program, whose ﬁrst line is the
declaration of g, which is deﬁned after the deﬁnition of f:

int g ( int n );
int f ( int n ){

r e t u r n g ( n );

}
int g ( int n ){

if ( n == 0) r e t u r n 0;
r e t u r n f (n -1);

}

More recent versions of C (notably, C99) allow compilation without the declaration
of the functions used before their deﬁnition. In these cases, a compilation warning
is usually issued (“implicit declaration of function g”). Python, on the other hand,

7 Java has a similar rule, which, however, is statically checked by the compiler, which uses a fairly
sophisticated analysis of all possible execution paths in a program.
8 C distinguishes between function declaration and function deﬁnition, which is the construct intro-
ducing the body of the function. Declaration and deﬁnition may appear at different places in the
program, even in different ﬁles.

80

4 Names and the Environment

has no problem with mutual recursion, since there is no static check on the scopes
of names used in the body of functions.

The rule of declaration before use is relaxed in as many ways as there are pro-
gramming languages. Java, for example, allows a declaration to appear at any point
in a block. If the declaration is of a variable, its scope extends from the point of
declaration to the end of the block (except the holes in scope due to redeﬁnitions in
nested blocks). If, on the other hand, the declaration refers to a member of a class
(either a ﬁeld or a method), it is visible in all the class in which it appears, indepen-
dent of the order in which the declarations occur (thus making mutually recursive
methods possible).

4.4 Summary

In this chapter we have seen the primary aspects of name handling in high-level
languages. The presence of the environment, that is of a set of associations between
names and the objects they represent, constitute one of the principal characteristics
that differentiate high-level from low-level languages. Given the lack of environment
in low-level languages, name management, as well as that of the environment, is an
important aspect in the implementation of a high-level language. We will see imple-
mentation aspects of name management in the next chapter. Here we are interested
in those aspects which must be known to every user (programmer) of a high-level
language so that they fully understand the signiﬁcance of names and, therefore, of
the behaviour of programs.

In particular, we have analysed the aspects that are listed below:

(cid:129) The concept of denotable objects. These are the objects to which names can be
given. Denotable objects vary according to the language under consideration, even
if some categories of object (for example, variables) are fairly general.

(cid:129) Environment. The set of associations existing at runtime between names and deno-

table objects.

(cid:129) Blocks. In-line or associated with procedures, these are the fundamental construct

for structuring the environment and for the deﬁnition of visibility rules.

(cid:129) Environment Types. These are the three components which at any time characterise
the overall environment: local environment, global environment and non-local
environment.

(cid:129) Operations on Environments. Associations present in the environment in addition
to being created and destroyed, can also be deactivated, a re-activated and, clearly,
can be used.

(cid:129) Scope Rules. Those rules which, in every language, determine the visibility of

names.

(cid:129) Static Scope. The kind of scope rule typically used by the most important pro-

gramming languages.

4.6 Exercises

81

(cid:129) Dynamic Scope. The scope rule that is easiest to implement. Used today in few

languages.

In an informal fashion, we can say that the rules which deﬁne the environment are
composed of rules for visibility between blocks and of scope rules, which characterise
how the non-local environment is determined. In the presence of procedures, the rules
we have given are not yet sufﬁcient to deﬁne the concept of environment. We will
return to this issue in Chap. 7 (in particular at the end of Sect. 7.2.1).

4.5 Bibliographical Notes

General texts on programming languages, such as [1–3], treat the concepts seen in
this chapter, although they usually present them together with their implementations.
For clarity of exposition, we have chosen to present in this chapter only the semantical
concepts for name handling, while we will consider their implementation in the next
chapter.

4.6 Exercises

Exercises 6–13, while really being centered on issues relating to scope, presuppose
knowledge of parameter passing which we will discuss in Chap. 7.

1. Consider the following program fragment written in a pseudo-language which
uses static scope and where the primitive read(Y) allows the reading of the
variable Y from standard input.

...
int X = 0;
int Y ;
void fie (){
X ++;

}
void foo (){
X ++;
fie ();

}
read ( Y );
if Y > 0{ int X = 5;

foo ();}

else foo ();
w r i t e ( X );

State what the printed values are.

82

4 Names and the Environment

2. Consider the following program fragment written in a pseudo-language that uses

dynamic scope.

...
int X ;
X = 1;
int Y ;
void fie () {
foo ();
X = 0;

}
void foo (){
int X ;
X = 5;

}
read ( Y );
if Y > 0{ int X ;
X = 4;
fie ();}
fie ();

else
w r i t e ( X );

State which is (or are) the printed values.

3. Consider the following code fragment in which there are gaps indicated by (*)

and (**). Provide code to insert in these positions in such a way that:

a. If the language being used employs static scope, the two calls to the procedure

foo assign the same value to x.

b. If the language being used employs dynamic scope, the two calls to the pro-

cedure foo assign different values to x.

The function foo must be appropriately declared at (*).

{ int i ;
(*)
for ( i =0; i <=1; i ++){

int x ;
(**)
x = foo ();
}

}

4. Provide an example of a denotable object whose life is longer than that of the

references (names, pointers, etc.) to it.

5. Provide an example of a connection between a name and a denotable object

whose life is longer than that of the object itself.

6. Say what will be printed by the following code fragment written in a pseudo-

language which uses static scope; the parameters are passed by a value.

4.6 Exercises

83

{ int x = 2;

int fie ( int y ){

x = x + y ;

}

{ int x = 5;

fie ( x );
w r i t e ( x );

}

w r i t e ( x );

}

7. Say what is printed by the code in the previous exercise if it uses dynamic scope

and call by reference.

8. State what is printed by the following fragment of code written in a pseudo-

language which uses static scope and passes parameters by reference.

{ int x = 2;

void fie ( r e f e r e n c e int y ){

x = x + y ;
y = y + 1;

}
{ int x = 5;
int y = 5;
fie ( x );
w r i t e ( x );

}
w r i t e ( x );

}

9. State what will be printed by the following code fragment written in a pseudo-
language which uses static scope and passes its parameters by value (a command
of the form foo(w++) passes the current value of w to foo and then increments
it by one).

{ int x = 2;

void fie ( v a l u e int y ){

x = x + y ;

}
{ int x = 5;
fie ( x ++);
w r i t e ( x );

}
w r i t e ( x );

}

10. State what will be printed by the following fragment of code written in a pseudo-

language which uses static scope and call by name.

{ int x = 2;

void fie ( name int y ){

x = x + y ;

}

84

4 Names and the Environment

{ int x = 5;

{ int x = 7
}

fie ( x ++);
w r i t e ( x );

}
w r i t e ( x );

}

11. State what will be printed by the following code written in a pseudo-language

which uses dynamic scope and call by reference.

{ int x = 1;
int y = 1;
void fie ( r e f e r e n c e int z ){

z

= x + y + z ;

}
{ int y = 3;

{ int x = 3
}
fie ( y );
w r i t e ( y );

}
w r i t e ( y );

}

12. State what will be printed by the following fragment of code written in a pseudo-

language which uses static scope and call by reference.

{ int x = 0;

int A ( r e f e r e n c e int y ) {
int x =2;
y = y +1;
r e t u r n B ( y )+ x ;

}
int B ( r e f e r e n c e int y ){

int C ( r e f e r e n c e int y ){

int x = 3;
r e t u r n A ( y )+ x + y ;

}
if ( y ==1) r e t u r n C ( x )+ y ;
e l s e r e t u r n x + y ;

}
w r i t e ( A ( x ));

}

13. Consider the following fragment of code in a language with static scope and

parameter passing both by value and by name:

{ int z = 0;

int O m e g a (){

r e t u r n O m e g a ();

}

References

85

int foo ( int x , int y ){
if ( x ==0) r e t u r n x ;
e l s e r e t u r n x + y ;

}
w r i t e ( foo ( z , O m e g a ()+ z ));

}

(i) State what will be the result of the execution of this fragment in the case in

which the parameters to foo are passed by name.

(ii) State what will be the result of the execution of this fragment in the case in

which the parameters to foo are passed by value.

References

1. T.W. Pratt, M.V. Zelkowitz, Programming Languages: Design and Implementation, 4th ed.

(Pearson, 2000)

2. M.L. Scott, Programming Language Pragmatics (Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2000)
3. R. Sethi, Programming Languages: Concepts and Constructs (Addison-Wesley, 1996)
