# Fuente
- archivo: 106-135.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/(Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science) Maurizio Gabbrielli_ Simone Martini - Programming Languages_ Principles and Paradigms (2nd Edition)-Springer (2023)/106-135.pdf
- extraido: 2026-04-27T21:01:31

# Contenido

Memory Management

5

An important component of an abstract machine’s interpreter is the one dealing
with memory management. If this component can be extremely simple in a physical
machine, memory management in an abstract machine for a high-level language is
fairly complicated and can employ a range of techniques. We will see both static and
dynamic management and will examine activation records, the system stack and the
heap. One section in particular is dedicated to the data structures and mechanisms
used to implement scope rules.

Conceptually, also garbage-collection techniques—that is, tools for the automatic
recovery of memory allocated in the heap—are included in memory management.
However, to make the presentation more coherent, these techniques will be explained
in Sect. 8.12, after having dealt with data types and pointers.

5.1 Techniques for Memory Management

As we said in Chap. 1, memory management is one of the functions of the interpreter
associated with an abstract machine. This functionality manages the allocation of
memory for programs and for data, that is determines how they must be arranged
in memory, how much time they may remain and which auxiliary structures are
required to fetch information from memory.

In the case of a low-level abstract machine, memory management is very simple
and can be entirely static. Before execution of the program begins, the program
in machine language and its associated data is loaded into an appropriate area of
memory, where it remains until its execution ends.

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
M. Gabbrielli and S. Martini, Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms,
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34144-1_5

87

88

5 Memory Management

In the case of a high-level language, matters are, for various reasons, more compli-
cated. First of all, if the language permits recursion, static allocation is insufﬁcient.1
In fact, while we can statically establish the maximum number of active non-recursive
procedures at any point during execution, in presence of recursive procedures this
is no longer true. The number of simultaneously active procedure calls can depend
on the parameters of the procedures or, generally, on information available only at
runtime.

Example 5.1 Consider the following fragment:

int fib ( int n ) {

if ( n == 0) r e t u r n 1;
else if ( n == 1) r e t u r n 1;

e l s e r e t u r n fib (n -1) + fib (n -2);

}

which, if called with an argument n, computes (in a very inefﬁcient way) the value
of the nth Fibonacci number. Let us recall that Fibonacci numbers are the terms
of the sequence2 deﬁned inductively as follows: Fib(0) = Fib(1) = 1; Fib(n) =
Fib(n − 1) + Fib(n − 2), for n > 1. It is clear that the number of active calls to
Fib depends, other than on the point of execution, on the value of the argument, n.
Using a simple recurrence relation, it can be veriﬁed that the number, C(n), of
calls to Fib necessary to calculate the value of the term Fib(n) (and, therefore, the
simultaneously active calls) is exactly equal to this value. From a simple inspection
of the code, indeed, it can be seen that C(n) = 1 for n = 0 and n = 1, while
C(n) = C(n − 1) + C(n − 2) for n > 1. It is known that the Fibonacci numbers
grow exponentially, so the number of simultaneously active calls to fib is of the
(cid:2)
order of O(2n), when trying to compute fib(n).

Given that every procedure call requires its own memory space to store param-
eters, intermediate results, return addresses, and so on, in the presence of recursive
procedures, static allocation of memory is no longer sufﬁcient and we have to allow
dynamic memory allocation and deallocation operations, which are performed during
the execution of the program. Such dynamic memory processing can be implemented
in a natural fashion using a stack for procedure (or in-line block) activations since
they follow a LIFO (Last In First Out) policy—the last procedure called (or the last
block entered) will be the ﬁrst to be exited.

There are, however, other cases which require dynamic memory management
for which a stack is not enough. These are cases in which the language allows
explicit memory allocation and deallocation operations, as happens, for example, in
C with the malloc and free commands. In these cases, given that the allocation

1 We will see below an exception to this general principle. This is the case of so-called tail recursion.
2 The sequence takes the name of the Pisan mathematician of the same name, known also as Leonardo
da Pisa (ca., 1175–1250), who seems to have encountered the sequence by studying the increase in
a population of rabbits. For information on inductive deﬁnition, see the box on Sect. 6.5.

5.2 Static Memory Management

89

operation (malloc) and the one for deallocation (free) can be alternated in any
order whatsoever, it is not possible to use a stack to manage the memory and, as we
will better see as the chapter unfolds, a particular memory structure called a heap is
used.

5.2 Static Memory Management

Static memory management is performed by the complier before execution starts.
Statically allocated memory objects reside in a ﬁxed zone of memory (which is
determined by the compiler) and they remain there for the entire duration of the
program’s execution. Typical elements which are statically allocated are global vari-
ables. These indeed can be stored in a memory area that is ﬁxed before execution
begins because they are visible throughout the program. The object code instructions
produced by the compiler can be considered another kind of static object, given that
normally they do not change during the execution of the program, so in this case also
memory will be allocated by the compiler. Constants are other elements that can be
handled statically (in the case in which their values do not depend on other values
which are unknown at compile time). Finally, various compiler-generated tables,
necessary for the runtime support of the language (for example, for handling names,
for type checking, for garbage collection) are stored in reserved areas allocated by
the compiler.

In the case in which the language does not support recursion it is possible statically
to handle the memory for other components of the language. This is done by statically
associating to any subprogram an area of memory in which the information local
to the subprogram (or subroutine) is stored3 itself. This information is composed
of local variables, possible parameters of the procedure (containing both arguments
and results), the return address (or the address to which control must pass when the
procedure terminates), possible temporary values used in complex calculations and
various pieces of “bookkeeping” information (saved register values, information for
debugging and so on).

The situation of a language with only static memory allocation is shown in Fig. 5.1.
Successive calls to the same procedure share the same memory areas. This is correct
because, in the absence of recursion, there cannot be two different calls to the same
procedure that are active at the same time.

3 It would be more correct to speak of subroutines because this was the term used in languages that
used static memory allocation, such as the ﬁrst versions of Fortran from the 1960 and 1970s.

90

5 Memory Management

System
Information

Return
Address

Parameters

Local
Variables

Intermediate
Results

. . .

Procedure 1

Procedure 2

. . .

Procedure n

Fig. 5.1 Static memory management

5.3 Dynamic Memory Management Using Stacks

Most modern programming languages allow block structuring of programs.4 Blocks,
whether in-line or associated with procedures, are entered and left using the LIFO
scheme. When a block A is entered, and then a block B is entered, before leaving
A, it is necessary to leave B. It is therefore natural to manage the memory space
required to store the information local to each block using a stack. We will see an
example.

4 We will see below that important languages, such as C, though, do not offer the full potential
of this mechanism, in that they do not permit the declaration of local procedures and functions in
nested blocks.

5.3 Dynamic Memory Management Using Stacks

91

Fig. 5.2 Allocation of an
activation record for block A
in Example 5.2

b
a

0
1

. . .

Act Rec for A

Example 5.2 Let us consider the following program:

A :{ int a = 1;
int b = 0;

B :{ int c = 3;
int b = 3;

}
b = a +1;

}

At runtime, when block A is entered, a push operation allocates a space large
enough to hold the variables a and b, as shown in Fig. 5.2. When block B is entered,
we have to allocate a new space on the stack for the variables c and b (recall that
the inner variable b is different from the outer one) and therefore the situation, after
this second allocation, is that shown in Fig. 5.3. When block B exits, on the other
hand, it is necessary to perform a pop operation to deallocate from the stack the
space that had been reserved for the block. The situation after such a deallocation
and after the assignment is shown in Fig. 5.4. Analogously, when block A exits, it
will be necessary to perform another pop to deallocate the space for A as well.

The case of procedures is similar; we consider it in Sect. 5.3.2.
The memory space, allocated on the stack, dedicated to an in-line block or to
an activation of a procedure is called the activation record, or frame. Note that an
activation record is associated with a speciﬁc activation of a procedure and not with
the declaration of a procedure: a new activation record is dynamically created each
time, during execution, a procedure is called. The values that must be stored in an
activation record (local variables, temporary variables, etc.) are indeed different for
the different calls on the same procedure.

The stack on which activation records are stored is called the runtime (or system)

stack.

It should ﬁnally be noted, that to improve the use of runtime memory, dynamic
memory management is sometimes also used to implement languages that do not
support recursion. If the average number of simultaneously active calls to the same
procedure is less than the number of procedures declared in the program, using a
stack will save space, for there will be no need to allocate a memory area for each
declared procedure, as must be done in the case of entirely static management.

92

Fig. 5.3 Allocation of
activation records for
blocks A and B in
Example 5.2

Fig. 5.4 Organisation after
the execution of the
assignment in Example 5.2

5 Memory Management

0
1

3
3

2
1

b
a

b
c

b
a

. . .

. . .

. . .

Act Rec for A

Act Rec for B

Act Rec for A

5.3.1 Activation Records for In-Line Blocks

The structure of a generic activation record for an in-line block is shown in Fig. 5.5.
The various sectors of the activation record contain the following information:

Fig. 5.5 Organisation of an
activation record for an
in-line block

Dynamic chain pointer

Local variables

Intermediate results

5.3 Dynamic Memory Management Using Stacks

93

Fig. 5.6 An activation
record with space for
intermediate results

a
a + x
x + y

3

value
value

Intermediate results When calculations must be performed, it can be necessary
to store intermediate results, even if the programmer does not assign an explicit
name to them. For example, the activation record for the block:

{ int a =3;

b = ( a + x )/ ( x + y );}

could take the form shown in Fig. 5.6, where the intermediate results (a+x) and
(x+y) are explicitly stored before the division is performed. The need to store
intermediate results on the stack depends on the compiler being used and on the
architecture to which one is compiling. On many architectures they can be stored
in registers.

Local variables Local variables which are declared inside blocks, must be stored
in a memory space whose size will depend on the number and type of the vari-
ables. This information in general is recorded by the compiler which therefore
will be able to determine the size of this part of the activation record. In some
cases, however, there can be declarations which depend on values recorded only
at runtime (this is, for example, the case for dynamic arrays, which are present in
some languages, whose dimensions depend on variables which are only instan-
tiated at execution time). In these cases, the activation record also contains a
variable-length part which is deﬁned at runtime. We will examine this in detail in
Chap. 8 when discussing arrays.

Dynamic chain pointer This ﬁeld stores a pointer to the previous activation
record on the stack (or to the last activation record created). This information
is necessary because, in general, activation records have different sizes. Some
authors call this pointer the dynamic link or control link. The set of links imple-
mented by these pointers is called the dynamic chain.

5.3.2 Activation Records for Procedures

The case of procedures and functions5 is analogous to that of in-line blocks but with
some additional complications due to the fact that, when a procedure is activated,

5 Here and below, we will almost always use the terms “function” and “procedure” as synonyms.
Although there are is no agreement between authors, the term “procedure” should denote a sub-
program which does not directly return a value, while a function is a subprogram that returns
one.

94

5 Memory Management

it is necessary to store a greater amount of information to manage correctly the
control ﬂow. The structure of a generic activation record for a procedure is shown
in Fig. 5.7. Recall that a function, unlike a procedure, returns a value to the caller
when it terminates its execution. Activation records for the two cases are therefore
identical with the exception that, for functions, the activation record must also keep
tabs on the memory location in which the function stores its return value.
Let us now look in detail at the various ﬁelds of an activation record:

Intermediate results, local variables, dynamic chain pointer The same as for

in-line blocks.

Static chain pointer This stores the information needed to implement the static

scope rules described in Sect. 5.5.1.

Return address Contains the address of the ﬁrst instruction to execute after the

call to the current procedure/function has terminated execution.

Returned result

Present only in functions. Contains the address of the memory
location where the subprogram stores the value to be returned by the function
when it terminates. This memory location is inside the caller’s activation record.
Parameters The values of actual parameters used to call the procedure or function

are stored here.

The organisation of the different ﬁelds of the activation record varies from imple-
mentation to implementation. The dynamic chain pointer and, in general, every
pointer to an activation record, points to a ﬁxed (usually central) area of the activa-
tion record. The addresses of the different ﬁelds are obtained, therefore, by adding a
negative or positive offset to the value of the pointer.

Variable names are not normally stored in activation records and the compiler
substitutes references to local variables for addresses relative to a ﬁxed position in
(i.e., an offset into) the activation record for the block in which the variables are
declared. This is possible because the position of a declaration inside a block is ﬁxed
statically and the compiler can therefore associate every local variable with an exact
position inside the activation record.

In the case of references to non-local variables, also, as we will see when we dis-
cuss scope rules, it is possible to use mechanisms that avoid storing names and there-
fore avoid having to perform a runtime name-based search through the activation-
record stack in order to resolve a reference.

Finally, modern compilers often optimise the code they produce and save some
information in registers instead of in the activation record. For simplicity, in this
book, we will not consider these optimisations. In any case for greater clarity, in the
examples, we will assume that also variable names are stored in activation records.
To conclude, let us note that all the observations that we have made about variable
names, their accessibility and storage in activation records, can be extended to other
kinds of denotable object.

5.3 Dynamic Memory Management Using Stacks

95

Dynamic Chain Pointer

Static Chain Pointer

Return Address

Address for Result

Parameters

Local Variables

Intermediate Results

Fig. 5.7 Structure of the activation record for a procedure

Start of Stack

Dynamic Chain
Pointer

Act Rec

Act Rec

. . .

Act Rec

Free memory
area for stack

Act Rec Pointer

Pointer to Stack
Top

Fig. 5.8 The stack of activation records

96

5 Memory Management

5.3.3 Stack Management

Figure 5.8 shows the structure of a system stack which we assume growing down-
wards (the direction of stack growth varies according to the implementation). As
shown in the ﬁgure, an external pointer to the stack points to the last activation
record on the stack (pointing to a predetermined area of the activation record which
is used as a base for calculating the offsets used to access local names). This pointer,
which we call the activation record pointer, is also called the frame or current envi-
ronment pointer (because environments are implemented using activation records).
In the ﬁgure, we have also indicated where the ﬁrst free location is. This second
pointer, used in some implementations, can, in principle, also be omitted if the acti-
vation record pointer always points to a position that is at a pre-deﬁned distance from
the start of the free area on the stack.

Activation records are stored on and removed from the stack at runtime. When a
block is entered or a procedure is called, the associated activation record is pushed
onto the stack; it is later removed from the stack when the block is exited or when
the procedure terminates.

The runtime management of the system stack is implemented by code fragments
which the compiler (or interpreter) inserts immediately before and after the call to a
procedure or before the start and after the end of a block.

Let us examine in detail what happens in the case of procedures, given that the

case of in-line blocks is only a simpliﬁcation.

First of all, let us clarify the terminology that we are using. We use “caller” and
“callee” to indicate, respectively, the program or procedure that performs a call (of
a procedure) and the procedure that has been called.

Stack management is performed both by the caller and by the callee. To do this,
as well as handling other control information, a piece of code called the calling
sequence is inserted into the caller. The calling sequence, in fact, is executed in part
immediately before the procedure call; the remainder of this code is executed imme-
diately after the termination of the call. In the callee two pieces of code are added: a
prologue, to be executed immediately after entering the call, and an epilogue, which
is executed before the procedure ends execution. These three code fragments manage
the different operations needed to handle activation records and correctly implement
a procedure call. The exact division of what the caller and callee do depends, as usual,
on the compiler and on the speciﬁc implementation under consideration. Moreover,
to optimize the size of the code produced, it is preferable that the larger part of
the activity is given to the callee, since the code is added only once (to the code
associated with the deﬁnition of the procedure) instead of many times (to the code
associated with different calls). Without further specifying how these activities are
divided between caller and callee, at the moment of a call to a procedure, the calling
sequence and the prologue must handle the following tasks:

Modiﬁcation of program counter This is clearly necessary to pass control to the
called procedure. The old value (incremented) must be saved to maintain the
return address.

5.4 Dynamic Management Using a Heap

97

Allocation of stack space The space for the new activation record must be pre-
allocated and therefore the pointer to the ﬁrst free location on the stack must be
updated as a consequence.

Modiﬁcation of activation record pointer The pointer must point to the new
activation record for the called procedure; the activation record will have been
pushed onto the stack.

Parameter passing This activity is usually performed by the caller, given that

different calls of the same procedure can have different parameters.

Register save Values for control processing, typically stored in registers, must be
saved. This is the case, for example, with the old activation record pointer which
is saved as a pointer in the dynamic chain.

Execution of initialisation code

Some languages require explicit constructs to

initialise some items stored in the new activation record.

When control returns to the calling program, i.e. when the callee terminates, the
epilogue (in the callee) and the calling sequence (in the caller) must perform the
following operations:

Update of program counter This is necessary to return control to the caller.
Value return The values of parameters which pass information from the caller to
the called procedure, or the value calculated by the function, must be stored in
appropriate locations usually present in the caller’s activation record and acces-
sible to the activation record of the called procedure.

Return of registers The value of previously saved registers must be restored. In

particular, the old value of the activation record pointer must be restored.

Execution of ﬁnalisation code

Some languages require the execution of appro-

priate ﬁnalisation code before any local objects can be destroyed.

Deallocation of stack space The activation record of the procedure which has
terminated must be removed from the stack. The pointer to (the ﬁrst free position
on) the stack must be modiﬁed as a result.

It should be noted that in the above description, we have omitted the handling of
the data structures necessary for the implementation of scope rules. This will be
considered in detail in Sect. 5.5 of this chapter.

5.4 Dynamic Management Using a Heap

In the case in which the language includes explicit commands for memory allocation,
as for example do C and Pascal, management using just the stack is insufﬁcient.
Consider for example the following C fragment:

98

5 Memory Management

int *p , * q ; /* p , q
p =

m a l l o c ( s i z e o f ( int ));

NULL p o i n t e r s to i n t e g e r s */

/* a l l o c a t e s the m e m o r y p o i n t e d to by p */

q =

m a l l o c ( s i z e o f ( int ));

* p = 0;
* q = 1;
free ( p );
free ( q );

/* a l l o c a t e s the m e m o r y p o i n t e d to by
/* d e r e f e r e n c e s and a s s i g n s */
/* d e r e f e r e n c e s and a s s i g n s */
/* d e a l l o c a t e s the m e m o r y p o i n t e d to by p */
/* d e a l l o c a t e s the m e m o r y p o i n t e d to by q */

q */

Given that the memory deallocation operations are performed in the same order

as allocations (ﬁrst p, then q), the memory cannot be allocated in LIFO order.

To manage explicit memory allocations, which can happen at any time, a particular
area of memory, called a heap, is used. Note that this term is used in computing also
to mean a particular type of data structure which is representable using a binary tree
or a vector, used to implement efﬁciently priorities (and used also in the “heap sort”
sorting algorithm, where the term “heap” was originally introduced). The deﬁnition
of heap that we use here has nothing to do with this data structure. In the programming
language jargon, a heap is simply an area of memory in which blocks of memory
can be allocated and deallocated relatively freely.

Heap management methods fall into two main categories according to whether

the memory blocks are considered to be of ﬁxed or variable length.

5.4.1 Fixed-Length Blocks

In this case, the heap is divided into a certain number of elements, or blocks, of fairly
small ﬁxed length, linked into a list structure called the free list, as shown in Fig. 5.9.
At runtime, when an operation requires the allocation of a memory block from the

Fig. 5.9 Free list in a heap
with ﬁxed-size blocks

FL Start

...

. . .

5.4 Dynamic Management Using a Heap

99

Fig. 5.10 Free list for heap
of ﬁxed-size blocks after
allocation of some memory.
Grey blocks are allocated (in
use)

FL Start

. . .

heap (for example using the malloc command), the ﬁrst element of the free list is
removed from the list, the pointer to this element is returned to the operation that
requested the memory and the pointer to the free list is updated so that it points to
the next element.

When memory is, on the other hand, freed or deallocated (for example using
free), the freed block is linked again to the head of the free list. The situation after
some memory allocations is shown in Fig. 5.10. Conceptually, therefore, manage-
ment of a heap with ﬁxed-size blocks is simple, provided that it is known how to
identify and reclaim the memory that must be returned to the free list easily. These
operations of identiﬁcation and recovery are not obvious, as we will see below.

5.4.2 Variable-Length Blocks

In the case in which the language allows the runtime allocation of variable-length
memory spaces, for example, to store an array of variable dimensions, ﬁxed-length
blocks are no longer adequate. In fact, the memory to be allocated can have a size
greater than the ﬁxed block size, and the storage of an array requires a contiguous
region of memory that cannot be allocated as a series of (non-contiguous) blocks. In
such cases, a heap-based management scheme using variable-length blocks is used.
This second type of management uses different techniques, mainly deﬁned with
the aim of increasing memory occupation and execution speed for heap manage-
ment operations (recall that they are performed at runtime and therefore impact the
execution time of the program). As usual, these two characteristics are difﬁcult to
reconcile and good implementations tend towards a rational compromise.

100

5 Memory Management

FL

Free Memory

Occupied
Memory

Requested
Memory

x + y > z
x < z
y < z

x

y

z

Fig. 5.11 External fragmentation

In particular, as far as memory occupancy is concerned, it is a goal to avoid
the phenomenon of memory fragmentation. So-called internal fragmentation occurs
when a block of size strictly larger than the one requested by the program is allocated.
The portion of unused memory internal to the block clearly will be wasted until
the block is returned to the free list. Internal fragmentation, however, is not the
most serious problem. So-called external fragmentation is worse. This occurs when
the free list is composed of blocks of relatively small size, when the sum of the
total available free memory would be enough to satisfy a request, but this cannot
be fulﬁlled because the available memory is scattered between different blocks.
Figure 5.11 shows an example of this problem. If we have blocks of size x and
y (words or some other unit—it has no relevance here) on the free list and we
request the allocation of a block of greater size, our request cannot be satisﬁed
despite the fact that the total amount of free memory is greater than the amount of
memory that has been requested. The memory allocation techniques tend therefore
to “compact” free memory, merging contiguous free blocks in such a way as to avoid
external fragmentation. To achieve this objective, merging operations can be called
which increase the load imposed by the management methods and therefore reduce
efﬁciency.

Single Free List

The ﬁrst technique we examine deals with a single free list, initially composed of a
single memory block containing the entire heap. It is indeed convenient to seek to
maintain blocks of the largest possible size. It makes no sense, therefore, initially to
divide the heap into many small blocks as, on the other hand, we did in the case of

5.4 Dynamic Management Using a Heap

101

ﬁxed-size blocks. When the allocation of a block of n words of memory is requested,
the ﬁrst n words are allocated and the pointer to the start of the head is incremented
by n. Successive requests are handled in a similar way, while deallocated blocks
are collected on a free list. When the end of the heap’s memory space is reached, is
necessary to reuse deallocated memory and this can be done in the two following
ways:

(i) Direct use of the free list In this case, a free list of blocks of variable size is used.
When the allocation of a memory block n words in length is requested, the free
list is searched for a block of size k words, where k is greater than or equal to n.
The requested memory is allocated inside this block. The unused part of the block
(of size k − n) if longer than some predeﬁned threshold, is used to form a new
block that is inserted into the free list (internal fragmentation is permitted below
this threshold). The search for a block of sufﬁcient size can be performed using
one of two methods. Using ﬁrst ﬁt, the search is for the ﬁrst block of sufﬁcient
size, while using best ﬁt, the search is for a block whose size is the least of those
blocks of sufﬁcient size. The ﬁrst technique favours processing time, while the
second favours memory occupation. For both, however, the cost of allocation is
linear with respect to the number of blocks on the free list. If the blocks are held
in order of increasing block size, the two schemes are the same, because the list
is traversed until a large enough block is found. Moreover, in this case, the cost of
insertion of a block into the free list increases (from constant to linear), because
is necessary to ﬁnd the right place to insert it. Finally, when a deallocated block
is returned to the free list, in order to reduce external fragmentation, a check
is made to determine whether the physically adjacent blocks are free, in which
case they are compacted into a single block. This type of compaction is said to
be partial because it compacts only adjacent blocks.

(ii) Free memory compaction In this technique, when the end of the space initially
allocated to the heap is reached, all blocks that are still active are moved to the
end; they are the blocks that cannot be returned to the free list, leaving all the free
memory in a single contiguous block. At this point, the heap pointer is updated
so that it points to the start of the single block of free memory and allocation
starts all over again. Clearly, for this technique to work, the blocks of allocated
memory must be movable, something that is not always guaranteed (consider
blocks whose addresses are stored in pointers on the stack). Some compaction
techniques will be discussed in Sect. 8.12, when we discuss garbage collection.

Multiple Free Lists

To reduce the block allocation cost, some heap management techniques use different
free lists for blocks of different sizes. When a block of size n is requested, the list
that contains blocks of size greater than or equal to n is chosen and a block from this
list is chosen (with some internal fragmentation if the block has a size greater than
n). The size of the blocks in this case, too, can be static or dynamic and, in the case

102

5 Memory Management

of dynamic sizes, two management methods are commonly used: the buddy system
and the Fibonacci heap. In the ﬁrst, the size of the blocks in the various free lists
are powers of 2. If a block of size n is requested and k is the least integer such that
2k ≥ n, then a block of size 2k is sought (in the appropriate free list). If such a free
block is found, it is allocated, otherwise, a search is performed in the next free list
for a block of size 2k+1 and it is split into two parts. One of the two blocks (which
therefore has size 2k) is allocated, while the other is inserted into the free list for
blocks of size 2k. When a block resulting from a split is returned to the free list, a
search is performed for its “buddy”, that is the other half that was produced by the
split operation. If it is free, the two blocks are merged to re-form the initial block of
size 2k+1. The Fibonacci heap method is similar but uses Fibonacci numbers instead
of powers of 2 as block sizes. Given that the Fibonacci sequence grows more slowly
than the series 2n, this second method leads to less internal fragmentation.

5.5 Implementation of Scope Rules

The possibility of denoting objects, even complex ones, by names with appropriate
visibility rules constitutes one of the most important aspects that differentiate high-
level languages from low-level ones. The implementation of environments and scope
rules discussed in Chap. 4 requires suitable data structures. In this section, we analyze
these structures and their management.

Given that the activation record contains the memory space for local names, when
a reference to a non-local name is encountered, we must examine the activation
records that are still active (that is, the ones present on the stack), to ﬁnd the one that
corresponds to the block where the name in question was deﬁned. This will be the
block that contains the association to be used for our name. The order in which to
examine the activation records varies according to scope rule of our language.

5.5.1 Static Scope: The Static Chain

If the static scope rule is employed, as we anticipated in Chap. 4, the order in which
activation records are consulted when resolving non-local references is not the one
deﬁned by their position on the stack. In other words, the activation record connected
by the dynamic chain pointer is not necessarily the ﬁrst activation record in which to
look in order to resolve a non-local reference. The correct activation record within
which to look is deﬁned by the textual structure of the program. Let us see an example.

5.5 Implementation of Scope Rules

103

Example 5.3 Consider the following code (as usual, for ease of reference, we have
labelled the blocks):

A :{ int y =0;

B :{ int x = 0;

void fie ( int n ){

x = n +1;
y = n +2;

}
C :{ int x = 1;
fie (2);
w r i t e ( x );
}

}
w r i t e ( y );
}

After executing the call fie(2), the situation on the activation-record stack is
that shown in Fig. 5.12. The ﬁrst activation record on the stack (the uppermost one
in the ﬁgure) is for the outermost block; the second is the one for block B; the third
is for C and ﬁnally the fourth is the activation record for the call to the procedure.
The non-local variable, x, used in procedure fie, as we know from the static scope

A

B

C

ﬁe

y

x

ﬁe

x

n

. . .

int
. . .

. . .

int
fun
. . .

. . .

int
. . .

. . .

int
. . .

0

0

1

2

Code Pointer

Static Chain
Pointer

Dynamic Chain
Pointer

Act Rec Pointer

Fig. 5.12 Activation stack with static chain (see Example 5.3)

104

5 Memory Management

rule is not the one declared in block C but the one declared in block B. To be able
to locate this information correctly at runtime, the activation record for the call to
the procedure is connected by a pointer, called the static chain pointer, to the record
for the block containing the declaration of the variable. This record is linked, in its
turn, by a static chain pointer to the record for block A, because this block, being
the ﬁrst immediately external to B, is the ﬁrst block to be examined when resolving
references non-local to B. When, inside the call to procedure fie, the variables x
and y are used, to access the memory area in which they are stored the static chain
pointers are followed from fie’s activation record until ﬁrst the record for B is
encountered (for x) and then that for A (when searching for y).

Generalising this example, we can say that, for the runtime management of static
scope, the activation of the generic block B is linked by the static chain pointer to the
record for the block immediately enclosing B (that is the nearest block that textually
contains B). It should be noted that in the case in which B is the block for a procedure
call, the block immediately enclosing B is the one containing the declaration of the
procedure itself. Moreover if B is active, that is if its activation record is on the stack,
then also the blocks enclosing B must be active and therefore can be located on the
stack.

Hence, in addition to the dynamic chain, which is formed from the various records
present on the system stack (linked in the order of the stack itself), there exists a
static chain, formed from the various static chain pointers used to represent the static
nesting structure of the blocks within the program.

As an example, consider Fig. 5.13 which shows a generic structure of blocks which
results from nested procedures. Consider now the sequence of calls: A, B, C, D,
E, C, where it is intended that each call remains active when the next call is made.

B

C

A

D

E

Fig. 5.13 A block structure

5.5 Implementation of Scope Rules

105

A

B

C

D

E

C

Static Chain
Pointer

Dynamic Chain
Pointer

Fig. 5.14 Static chain for the previous structure and the sequence of calls A, B, C, D, E, C

The situation on the activation-record stack, with is various static chain pointers,
after such a sequence of calls is that shown in Fig. 5.14.

The runtime management of the static chain is one of the tasks performed by the
calling sequence, prologue and epilogue code, as we saw above. Such a management
of the static chain can be performed by the caller and the callee in various ways.
According to the most common approach, when a new block is entered, the caller
calculates the static chain pointer and then passes it to the callee. This computation
is fairly simple and can be easily understood by separating the two cases:

The callee is external to the caller

In this case, by the visibility rules deﬁned by
static scope, for the called routine to be visible, it must be located in an outer block
which includes the caller’s block. Therefore, the activation record for such an outer
block must already be stored on the stack. Assume that among the caller and the
called routines, there are k levels of nesting in the program’s block structure; if
the caller is located on nesting level n and the called routine is on level m, we
can assume therefore that k = n − m. This value of k can be determined by
the compiler, because it depends only on the static structure of the program and
therefore can be associated with the call in question. The caller can then calculate
the static chain pointer for the called procedure simply by dereferencing its own
static chain pointer k times (that is, it runs k steps along its own static chain).

The callee is inside the caller

In this case, the visibility rules ensure that the
called routine is declared in same the block in which the call occurs and therefore
the ﬁrst block external to the called one is precisely that of the caller. The static
chain pointer of the called routine must point to the caller’s activation record. The
caller can simply pass to the called routine the pointer to its own activation record
as a pointer to the static chain.

106

5 Memory Management

Once the callee has received the static chain pointer, it need only store it in the
appropriate place in its activation record, an operation that can be performed by
the prologue code. When a block exit occurs, the static chain requires no particular
management actions.

We have hinted at the fact that the compiler, in order to perform runtime static-
chain management, keeps track of the nesting level of procedure calls. This is done
using the symbol table, a sort of dictionary where, more generally, the compiler stores
all the names used in the program and all the information necessary to manage the
objects denoted by the names (for example to determine the type) and to implement
the visibility rules.

In particular, a number is maintained that depends on the nesting level and indicates
the scope that contains the declaration of a name; this allows to associate to each
name a number indicating the scope when the declaration for such a name is made.
Using this number, it is possible to calculate, at compile time, the distance between
the scope of the call and that of the declaration which is necessary at runtime to
handle the static chain.

It should be noted that this distance is calculated statically and it also allows
the runtime resolution of non-local references without having to perform any name
searches in the activation record on the stack. Indeed, if we use a reference to the
non-local name, x, to ﬁnd the activation record containing the memory space for x it
sufﬁces to start at the activation record corresponding to the block that contains the
reference and follow the static chain for a number of links equal to the value of the
distance. Inside the activation record that is thus found, the memory location for x
is also ﬁxed by the compiler and, therefore, at runtime, there is no need for a search
but only the static offset of x with respect to the activation record pointer is needed.
However, it is clear that, in a static model, the compiler cannot completely resolve
a reference to a non-local name and it is always necessary to follow the static-chain
links at runtime. This is why, in general, it is not possible to know statically what the
number of activation records present on the stack is.

As a concrete example of what has just been said, consider the code in Example 5.3.
The compiler “knows” that to use variable y in procedure fie, it is necessary to
pass two external blocks (B and A) to arrive at the one containing the declaration of
the variable. It is enough, therefore, to store this value at compilation time so that it
can subsequently be known, at runtime, that to resolve the name y, it is necessary
to follow two pointers in the static chain. It is not necessary to store the name y
explicitly because its position inside the activation record for the block A is ﬁxed by
the compiler. Analogously, the type information that we, for clarity, have included in
Fig. 5.12, is stored in the symbol table, and after appropriate compile-time checks,
can, in a large part, be omitted at runtime.

5.5 Implementation of Scope Rules

107

5.5.2 Static Scope: The Display

The implementation of static scope using the static chain has one inconvenient prop-
erty: if we have to use a non-local name declared in an enclosing block, k levels of
block away from the point at which we currently ﬁnd ourselves, at runtime we have
to perform k memory accesses to follow the static chain to determine the activation
block that contains the memory location for the name of interest. This problem is
not all that severe, given that in real programs it is rare that more than 3 levels of
block and procedure nesting are required. The technique called the display, however,
allows the reduction of the number of accesses to a constant (2).

This technique uses a vector, called the display, containing as many elements as
there are levels of block nesting in the program, where the kth element of the vector
contains the pointer to the activation record at nesting level k that is currently active.
When a reference is made to a non-local object, declared st level k, the activation
record containing this object can be retrieved by accessing the kth position in the
vector and following the pointer stored there.

Display processing is simple, even if it is slightly more costly than static chain
handling; when an environment is entered or left, in addition to updating the pointer
stored in the vector, it is also necessary to save the old value. More precisely, when a
procedure is called (or an in-line block is entered) at level k, position k in the display
will have to be updated with the value of the pointer to the activation record for the
call, because this has become the new active block at level k. Before this update,
however, it is necessary to save the preceding contents of the kth position of the
display, normally storing it in the activation record of the call.

The need to save the old display value can be better understood by examining the

following 2 possible cases:

The callee is external to the caller Let us assume that the call is at nesting level n
and the callee is at level m, with m < n. The callee and the caller, therefore, share
the static structure up to level m − 1 and also the display up to the position m − 1.
Display element m is updated with the pointer to the activation record of the callee
and until the called routine terminates, the active display is the one formed of the
ﬁrst m elements. The old value contained in position m must be saved because it
points to the activation record of the block which will be re-activated when the
callee terminates; thereafter, the display will go back to being the one used before
the call.

The callee is located inside the caller The nesting depth reached this far is incre-
mented. If the caller is located at level n, the caller and the callee share the whole
current display up to position n and it is necessary to add a new value at position
n + 1, so that it holds the pointer to the activation record for the caller. If this is
the ﬁrst activation of a block at level n + 1, the old value stored in the display has
no interest. However, this is not the general case. Indeed, we could have reached
the current call by a series of previous calls that also use level n + 1. In this case,
as well, it will be necessary to save the value in the display at position n + 1, so
that it could restore afterward.

108

5 Memory Management

. . .

1 2 3

A

B

C

A

B

C

D

E

A

B

A

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

E

C

Fig. 5.15 Display for the structure in Fig. 5.13 and the call sequence A, B, C, D, E, C

Both display update and the saving of the old value can be performed by the callee.
Figure 5.15 shows the handling of the display for the call sequence A, B, C, D, E, C,
using the block structure described in Fig. 5.13. The pointers on the left of the stack
denote storage of the old display value in the activation record of the callee, while
the dotted pointer denotes a display pointer that is not currently active.

5.5 Implementation of Scope Rules

109

5.5.3 Dynamic Scope: Association Lists and CRT

Conceptually, the implementation of the dynamic scope rule is much simpler than
the one for static scope. Indeed, given that non-local environments are considered in
the order in which they are activated at runtime, to resolve a non-local reference to
a name x, it sufﬁces, at least in principle, to run backwards across the stack, starting
with the current activation record until an activation record is found in which the
name x is declared.

The various associations between names and the objects they denote (i.e., the
various local environments) can be stored directly in the activation record. Let us
consider, for example, the block structure shown in Fig. 5.16, where the names denote
local variable declarations (assuming the usual visibility rules). If we execute the
call sequence A, B, C, D (where, as usual, all the calls remain active) when control
reaches block D, we obtain the stack shown in Fig. 5.17 (the ﬁeld on the right of each
name contains the information associated with the object denoted by its name). The
environment (local or otherwise) of D is formed from all the name-object associations
in which the information ﬁeld is in white in the ﬁgure. The association ﬁelds that are
no longer active are shown in grey. An association is not active either because the
corresponding name is no longer visible (this is the case for v6 ) or because it has
been redeﬁned in an inner block (this is the case for w and for the occurrences of x
in A and B).

Other than direct storage in the activation record, name-object associations can
be stored separately in an association list, called an A-list, which is managed like a
stack. This solution is usually chosen for Lisp implementations.

Fig. 5.16 A block structure
with local declarations

x
y

A

B

C

x

v

w

x

D

w

6 We discuss here the general case where you can deﬁne local environments following syntactic
nesting, still in the presence of dynamic scope. In “simple” languages with dynamic scope, like the
Unix shell language Bash, the name v would be visible from block D. In languages like Emacs
Lisp, on the other hand, you can mix dynamic scope with proper local declarations. In such a
language, in block B there could be both a declaration (setq x 3), introducing a dynamically
scoped variable, and another declaration (let ((v 7))), that instead creates a local variable
that follows a syntactic nesting discipline—so it is not visible in blocks that are at the same nesting
level, such as C and thus the enclosed D.

110

5 Memory Management

A

B

C

D

x
y

x
v

w
x

w

. . .

. . .
. . .

. . .
. . .

. . .
. . .

. . .

Fig. 5.17 Environment for
block D in Fig. 5.16 after the
call sequence A, B, C, D,
with dynamic scope
implemented using stored
associations in the activation
record. In grey: inactive
associations

Fig. 5.18 Environment for
block D in Fig. 5.16, after
the call sequence A, B, C, D,
with dynamic scope
implemented using an A-list

A-List Start

Act Rec Pointer

type, location,
active/inactive, etc.

”

”

”

”

”

”

xx

y

x

v

w

x

w

When the execution of a program enters a new environment, the new local associ-
ations are inserted into the A-list. When an environment is left, the local associations
are removed from the A-list. The information about the denoted objects will con-
tain the location in memory where the object is actually stored, its type, a ﬂag which
indicates whether the association for this object is active (there can also be other infor-
mation needed to make runtime semantic checks). Figure 5.18 shows how dynamic
scope is implemented for the example in Fig. 5.16 using an A-list (the information
about active/inactive associations—the grey ﬁelds of Fig. 5.17—are omitted from
the ﬁgure).

5.5 Implementation of Scope Rules

111

These two implementations of dynamic scope—using A-lists and using the
dynamic chain with direct storage in the activation record—are simple, but have
main two disadvantages.

First, names must be stored in structures present at runtime, unlike in the scheme
that we saw for static scope. In the case of the A-list, this is clear (it is the very
deﬁnition of this data structure). In the case, on the other hand, in which activation
records are used to implement local environments, the need to store names depends
on the fact that the same name, if declared in different blocks, can be stored in
different positions in different activation records. When we use the dynamic scope
rule, we cannot statically determine which is the block (and hence the activation
record) that should be used to resolve a non-local reference. Therefore, we cannot
know the position (i.e., the offset) in the activation record of the association for the
name we are looking for. The only possibility is therefore explicitly to store the name
and perform a search (based on the name itself) at runtime.

The second disadvantage is due to the inefﬁciency of this runtime search. It can
often be the case that is necessary to scan almost all of the list (which is either
an A-list or a stack of activation records) in the case reference is made to a name
declared in one of the ﬁrst active blocks (as for “global” names).

Central Referencing Environment Table (CRT)

To limit the impact of these two issues, at the cost of more inefﬁciency in the block
entry and exit operations, we can implement dynamic scope in a different way. This
alternative approach is based on the Central Referencing environment Table (CRT).
Using the CRT-based technique, environments are deﬁned by arranging for all the
blocks in the program to refer to an single central table (the CRT). All the names
used in the program are stored in this table. For each name, there is a ﬂag indicating
whether the association for the name is active or inactive, together with a pointer to
information about the object associated with the name (memory location, type, etc.).
If we assume that all the identiﬁers used in the program are known at compile time,
each name can be given a ﬁxed position in the table. At runtime, we can access the
table in constant time, by adding the memory address of the start of the table to an
offset for the name of interest. When, on the other hand, all names are not known at
compile time, the search for a name’s position in the table can be make use of runtime
hashing for efﬁciency. The block entry and exit operations now are, however, more
complicated. When entering block B from block A, the central table must be modiﬁed
to describe B’s new local environment, and, moreover, deactivated associations must
be saved so that they can be restored when block B exits and control returns to block
A. Usually a stack is the best data structure for storing such associations.

It should be observed that the associations for a block are not necessarily stored in
contiguous locations within the CRT. To perform the operations required of the CRT
on block entry and exit, it is necessary, therefore, to consider the individual elements
of the table. This can be done in a convenient fashion by associating with each entry
in the table (i.e., with every name present) a dedicated stack that contains the valid
associations at the top and, in successive locations, the associations for this name

112

5 Memory Management

declared
in C

declared
in B

declared
in A

x

y

v

w

1

1

0

1

declared
in D

declared
in C

type, location,
etc.

Fig. 5.19 Environment for block D in Fig. 5.16 after the call sequence A, B, C, D, with dynamic
scope implemented using a CRT

A
1
1
0
0

α1
α2
-
-

x
y

v
w

AB
1
1
1
0

β1
α2
β2
-

x
y

v
w

x α1

ABC
1
1
0
1

γ1
α2
β2
γ2

x
y

v
w

x α1
x β1

ABCD
γ1
x
1
y
α2
1
β2
0
δ1
1

v
w

x α1
x β1
w γ2

Fig. 5.20 Environment for block D of Fig. 5.16 after the call sequence A, B, C, D, with dynamic
scope implemented using a CRT and hidden stack

that have been deactivated. This solution is shown in Fig. 5.19 (the second column
contains the ﬂags).

Alternatively, we can use a single hidden stack separate from the central table
to store the deactivated associations for all names. In this case, for every name, the
second column of the table contains a ﬂag which indicates whether the association
for this name is active or not, while the third column contains the reference to the
object denoted by the name in question. When an association is deactivated, it is
stored in the hidden stack to be removed when it becomes active again. Considering
the structure in Fig. 5.16 and the call sequence A, B, C, D, the development of the
CRT is shown in the upper part of Fig. 5.20; the lower portion of the ﬁgure depicts
the evolution of the hidden stack.

Using the CRT, with or without the hidden stack. access to an association in the
environment requires one access to the table (either direct or by means of a hash
function) and one access to another memory area by means of the pointer stored in
the table. No runtime search is required.

5.6 Summary

5.6 Summary

113

In this chapter, we have examined the main techniques for both static and dynamic
memory management, illustrating the reasons for dynamic memory management
using a stack and those that require the use of a heap. It remains to consider the
important exception to this: in the presence of a particular type of recursion (called
tail recursion) memory can be managed in a static fashion (this case will be given
detailed consideration in the next chapter).

We have illustrated in detail the following on stack-based management:

• The format of activation records for procedures and in-line blocks.
• How the stack is managed by particular code fragments which are inserted into
the code for the caller, as well as in the routine being called, and which act to
implement the various operations for activation record allocation, initialisation,
control ﬁeld modiﬁcation, value passing, return of results, and so on.

In the case of heap-based management, we saw:

• Some of the more common techniques for its handling, both for ﬁxed- and variable-

sized blocks.

• The fragmentation problem and some methods which can be used to limit it.

Finally, we discussed the speciﬁc data structures and algorithms used to imple-
ment the environment and, in particular, to implement scope rules. We examined the
following in detail:

• The static chain.
• The display.
• The association list.
• The central referencing table.

This has allowed us better to understand our hint in Chap. 4 that it is more difﬁcult
to implement the static scope rules than those for dynamic scope. In the ﬁrst case,
indeed, whether static chain pointers or the display is used, the compiler makes
use of appropriate information on the structure of declarations. This information is
gathered by the compiler using symbol tables and associated algorithms, such as, for
example, LeBlanc-Cook’s, whose details fall outside the scope of the current text.
In the case of dynamic scope, on the other hand, management can be, in principle,
performed entirely at runtime, even if auxiliary structures are often used to optimise
performance (for example the Central Referencing Table).

114

5 Memory Management

5.7 Bibliographical Notes

Static memory management is usually treated in textbooks on compilers, of which
the classic is [1]. Matching between names in a symbol table and their (static) scopes
be done in a number of ways, among which one of the best known is due to LeBlanc
and Cook [2]. Techniques for heap management are discussed in many texts, for
example [3].

Stack-based management for procedures and for scope was introduced in Algol,

whose implementation is described in [4].

5.8 Exercises

1. Using some pseudo-language, write a fragment of code such that the maximum
number of activation records present on the stack at runtime is not statically
determinable.

2. In some pseudo-language, write a recursive function such that the maximum num-
ber of activation records present at runtime on the stack is statically determinable.
Can this example be generalised?
3. Consider the following code fragment:

A :{ int X =1;
....
B :{ X =3;
....

}

....
}

Assume that B is nested one level deeper that A. To resolve the reference to
X present in B, why is it not enough to consider the activation record which
immediate precedes that of B on the stack? Provide a counter-example ﬁlling the
spaces in the fragment with dots with appropriate code.

4. Consider the following program fragment written in a pseudo-language using

static scope:

void P1 {

void P2 { body - of - P2

}
void P3 {

void P4 { body - of - P4

}

body - of - P3

}

body - of - P1
}

5.8 Exercises

115

Draw the activation record stack—static and dynamic chain pointers—when the
following sequence of calls, P1, P2, P3, P4, P2 has been made (is it understood
that at this time they are all active: none has returned).

5. Let us consider the following code fragment in a pseudo-language with goto
(see Sect. 6.3.1), static scope and labelled nested blocks (indicated by
A: { ... }):

A : { int x = 5;

goto C ;

B : { int x = 4;
goto E ;
}

C : { int x = 3;

D : { int x = 2;
}

goto B ;

E : { int x = 1; // (**)

}

}

}

The static chain is handled using a display. Draw a diagram showing the display
and the stack when execution reaches the point of the comment (**). As far as
the activation records, show only the piece of information required for display
handling.

6. Is it easier to implement the static scope rule or the one for dynamic scope? Give

your reasons.

7. Consider the following piece of code written in a pseudo-language using static

scope and call by reference (see Sect. 7.1.2):

{ int x = 0;

int A ( r e f e r e n c e int y ) {

int x =2;
y = y +1;
r e t u r n B ( y )+ x ;

}
int B ( r e f e r e n c e int y ){

int C ( r e f e r e n c e int y ){

int x = 3;
r e t u r n A ( y )+ x + y ;

}
if ( y ==1) r e t u r n C ( x )+ y ;
e l s e r e t u r n x + y ;

}
w r i t e ( A ( x ));

}

Assume that static scope is implemented using a display. Draw a diagram showing
the state of the display and the activation-record stack when control enters the
function A for the second time. For every activation record, just give value for
the ﬁeld that saves the previous value of the display.

116

References

5 Memory Management

1. A.V. Aho, M.S. Lam, R. Sethi, J.D. Ullman, Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools, 2nd

ed. (Pearson Education, 2006)

2. R.P. Cook, T.J. LeBlanc, A symbol table abstraction to implement languages with explicit scope

control. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 9(1), 8–12 (1983)

3. C. Shaffer, A Practical Introduction to Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis (Addison-Wesley,

1996)

4. B. Randell, L.J. Russell, Algol 60 Implementation (Academic Press, London, 1964)
