# Fuente
- archivo: 136-282.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/(Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science) Maurizio Gabbrielli_ Simone Martini - Programming Languages_ Principles and Paradigms (2nd Edition)-Springer (2023)/136-282.pdf
- extraido: 2026-04-27T21:01:35

# Contenido

Control Structure

6

In this chapter, we will tackle the problem of managing sequence control, an impor-
tant part in deﬁning the execution of program instructions in a generic abstract
machine’s interpreter.

In low-level languages, sequence control is implemented in an elementary way, by
updating the value of the Program Counter register. In high-level languages, special
language-speciﬁc constructs permit the structuring of control and the implementation
of mechanisms more abstract than those available on the physical machine. Take, for
example, the evaluation of an arithmetic expression: even a simple operation of this
kind requires the use of control mechanisms specifying the order in which operands
are evaluated, operator precedence, and so on.

In this chapter, we will consider the constructs for the explicit or implicit speciﬁ-
cation of sequence control. We will ﬁrst consider expressions, spending some time
on the syntactic aspects of the usual notation for representing expressions, as well
as the semantic aspects of their evaluation. We will then move on to commands and,
after discussing the concepts of variable and assignment, we will see the main com-
mands for sequence control present in modern languages, showing the difference
between structured and unstructured control and brieﬂy illustrating the principles of
structured programming. We will ﬁnally examine some aspects that are signiﬁcant to
recursion and clarify a terminological distinction between imperative and declarative
languages.

Constructs for abstraction on control will the be subject of the next chapter.

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
M. Gabbrielli and S. Martini, Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms,
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34144-1_6

117

118

6.1 Expressions

6 Control Structure

Expressions, together with commands and declarations, are one of the basic compo-
nents of most programming language. We can say that expressions are the essential
component of every language because, although there exist declarative languages in
which commands are absent, expressions, numeric or symbolic, are present in every
language.

First, let us try to clarify what sorts of object we are talking about.

Deﬁnition 6.1 (Expression) An expression is a syntactic entity whose evaluation
either produces a value or fails to terminate, in which case the expression is undeﬁned.

The essential characteristic of an expression, which differentiates it from a com-
mand, is therefore that its evaluation produces a value. Examples of numerical expres-
sions are familiar: 4+3*2, for example, is an expression whose evaluation may be
seen as obvious. However, even in such a simple case, to obtain the correct result, we
should make an implicit assumption (derived from mathematical convention) about
operator precedence. This assumption—* has precedence over + (and, therefore, the
result is 10 and not 14)—speciﬁes a control aspect for evaluation of expressions. We
will see below other more subtle aspects that contribute to modify the result of the
evaluation of an expression.

Expressions can be non-numeric, for example in Lisp, we can write (cons a
b) to denote an expression which, when evaluated, returns the so-called pair formed
by a and b.

6.1.1 Expression Syntax

In general, an expression is composed of a single entity (constant, variable, etc.)
or of an operator (such as +, cons, etc.), applied to a number of arguments (or
operands) which are also expressions. We saw in Chap. 2 how expression syntax
can be precisely described by a context-free grammar and that an expression can be
represented by a derivation tree, which also expresses semantic information relating
to the evaluation of that expression. Tree structures are also often used to represent
an expression internally inside the computer. However, if we want to use expressions
in a conventional way in the text of a program, linear notations allow us to write an
expression as a sequence of symbols. Various notations differ from each other by
how they represent the application of an operator to its operands. We can distinguish
three main types of notation.

Inﬁx Notation

In inﬁx notation, a binary operation symbol is placed between the expressions rep-
resenting its two operands. For example, we write x+y to denote the addition of x
and y, or (x+y)*z to denote the multiplication by z of the result of the addition
of x and y. To avoid ambiguity in the application of operator to operands, brackets

6.1 Expressions

119

Lisp and S-expressions
The programming language Lisp (an acronym of LISt Processor), developed at the beginning of
the 1960s by John McCarthy and by a group of researchers at MIT (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology), is a language designed for symbolic processing, which has been particularly important
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence. In the 1970s, the language Scheme was developed from a dialect of Lisp;
Scheme is still in use in academic circles.

A Lisp program is composed of sequences of expressions to be evaluated by the language’s
interpreter. Some expressions are used to deﬁne functions which are then called in other expressions.
As the very name of the language implies, a Lisp program mainly handles expressions constructed
from lists. The basic data structures in Lisp, in fact, is the dotted pair—a pair of data items written
with a dot separating the two components, for example, (A.B). Such a pair is implemented as a cons
cell, or rather by the application of the cons operator to two arguments, as in (cons A B). The
two arguments of cons can be values of atomic types (integers, ﬂoating point numbers, character
strings), or other dotted pairs. We can therefore represents S-expressions (symbolic expressions)—
binary trees which allow the representation of lists as a particular case. For example, it is possible to
construct the list A B C as (cons A (cons B (cons C nil))), where nil is a particular
value denoting the empty list. Among the many interesting characteristics of Lisp, programs and
data are represented using the same syntax and the same internal representation. This allows the
evaluation of data structures as if they were programs and to modify programs as if they were data.

and precedence rules are required. For non-binary operators, inﬁx representation is
awkward and seldom used. A programming language which insists on inﬁx nota-
tion even for user-deﬁned functions is Smalltalk, one of the ﬁrst object-oriented
languages.

Inﬁx notation is the one used by most programming languages, at least for binary
mathematical operators. Often, however, this notation is only an abbreviation or, as
we say, a syntactic sugar used to make code more readable. For example, in Ada, a +
b is an abbreviation for +(a,b), in C++ is an abbreviation for a.operator+(b),
and, similarly, in Python stands for a.__add__(b).

Preﬁx Notation
In preﬁx notation (also calledpreﬁx Polish notation1 ), the operation symbol precedes
the symbols representing the operands (written from left to right, in the same way
as text). Thus, to write the sum of x and y, we can write +(x,y), or, without using
parentheses, + x y; to express the application of the function f to the operands a
and b, we write f(a b) or f a b.

With preﬁx notation, parentheses and operator precedence rules are of no rele-
vance, provided that the arity (that is the number of operands) of every operator is
known. There is no ambiguity about which operator to apply to any operands, because
it is always the one immediately preceding the operands. For example, provided +
and * are both binary operators, in

*(+( a b )+( c d ))

1 The Polish mathematician W. Łukasiewicz extensively used and studied preﬁx notation in his
mathematical logic writings.

120

or even

* + a b + c d

6 Control Structure

we can only mean the expression represented by (a+b)*(c+d) in normal inﬁx
notation.

Most programming languages use preﬁx notation for unary operators (often using
parentheses to group arguments) and for user-deﬁned functions. Some languages use
preﬁx notation also for binary operators. Lisp represents functions using a particular
notation known as Cambridge Polish, which places operators inside parentheses. In
this notation, for example the last expression becomes:

(*(+ a b )(+ c d )).

Postﬁx Notation

In postﬁx (also reverse Polish) notation, the operator symbol is placed after the
operands. For example, the last expression above when written in postﬁx notation is:

a b + c d + *.

Postﬁx notation is used in the intermediate code generated by some compilers. It

is also used in programming languages (for example Postscript).

An advantage of two Polish notations over inﬁx is that they can be used in a
uniform fashion to represent operators with any number of operands. In inﬁx notation,
on the other hand, representing operators with more than two operands means that
we have to introduce auxiliary operators. A second advantage, as we already said, is
that we may omit parentheses completely, even if, for the sake of readability, both
mathematical preﬁx notation f(a b) and Cambridge Polish (f a b) keep using
parentheses. A ﬁnal advantage of Polish notations is that it makes the evaluation of
an expression particularly simple, as we will see shortly. For this reason, this notation
became rather successful during the 1970s and 80s, when it was used for the ﬁrst
pocket-sized calculators.

6.1.2 Semantics of Expressions

The way in which we obtain a value out of an expression depends of course on the
notation used. In inﬁx representation the absence of parentheses can cause ambiguity
problems, if the precedence rules for different operators and the associativity of
every binary operator are not deﬁned clearly. In the case of programming languages,
expressions are often represented internally in the form of a tree.

Inﬁx Notation: Precedence and Associativity

When using inﬁx notation, we pay for the easiness of use with major complications
in the evaluation mechanism. First of all, if parentheses are not used systematically,
it is necessary to clarify the precedence of each operator.

6.1 Expressions

121

If we write 4+3*5, for example, clearly we intend the value of 19 as the result
of the expression and not 35: mathematical convention, in fact, tells us that we have
to perform the multiplication ﬁrst; that is, the expression is to be read as 4 + (5
* 3) and not as (4 + 3) * 5. In the case of less familiar operators, present in
programming languages, matters are considerably more complex. If, for example, in
Pascal we write:

x =4 and y =5

where and is the logical operator and = is the comparison operator for equality,
contrary to what many will probably expect, we will obtain an error (a static type
error) because, according to Pascal’s precedence rules, this expression is interpreted
as

x =(4 and y )=5

and not as

( x =4) and ( y =5).

To avoid excessive use of parentheses (which, when in doubt it is good to use),
programming languages employ precedence rules to specify a hierarchy between
the evaluation order of the different operators. Languages differ considerably in
their deﬁnition of such rules.

A second problem in expression evaluation concerns operator associativity. If we
write 15-5-3, we could intend it to be read as either (15-5)-3 or as 15-(5-3),
with clearly different results. In this case, mathematical convention says that the usual
interpretation should be the ﬁrst. In more formal terms, the operator “−” associates
from left to right.2 In fact, the majority of arithmetic operators in programming
languages associate from left to right but there are exceptions. The exponentiation
operator, for example, often associates from right to left, as in mathematical notation.
If we write 532
, or, using a notation more familiar to programmers, 5**3**2, we
mean 5(32), or 5**(3**2), and not (53)2, or ((5** 3)**2). Thus, when an
operator is used, it is useful to include parentheses when in doubt about precedence
and associativity.

Associativity is relevant also when mathematically it should make no difference.
Consider the sum a+b+c. For the mathematician, the result does not depend on the
order of evaluation of the two sums (addition is indeed associative). In a programming
languages, however, there could be rounding errors involved in the evaluation, which
could be very different if we evaluate our expression as (a+b)+c or as a+(b+c).
There are programming languages that present counter-intuitive behaviour. In
APL, for example, the expression 15-5-3 is interpreted as 15-(5-3). The reason
for this apparent strangeness is that in APL there are many new operators (deﬁned to
operate on matrices) that do not have an immediate equivalents in other formalisms.

2 A binary operator, op, is said to be associative if x op (y op z) = (x op y) op z
holds; that is, whether it associates from the right to the left or left to right makes no difference.

122

6 Control Structure

The designer of the language decided then it was better to have a uniform evaluation
strategy, from right to left.

In the design of an algorithm to evaluate an expression in inﬁx notation, the
implicit use of precedence and associativity rules, together with the explicit presence
of parentheses, complicates matters signiﬁcantly. In fact, it is not possible to evaluate
an expression in a single left-to-right scan (or one from right to left), given that in
some cases we must ﬁrst evaluate the rest of the expression and then come back. For
example, in the case of 5+3*2, when the scan from left to right arrives at +, we
have to suspend the evaluation of this operator, evaluate 3*2 and then go back to
the evaluation of +.

Preﬁx Notation

Expressions written in preﬁx notation lend themselves to a simple evaluation strategy
which proceeds by simply walking the expression from left to right using a stack
to hold its components. Let’s assume that the sequence of symbols that forms the
expression is syntactically correct and initially not empty. The evaluation algorithm
is described by the following steps, where we use an ordinary stack (with the push
and pop operations) and a counter C to store the number of operands requested by
the last operator that was read:

1. Read in a symbol from the expression and push it on the stack;
2. If the symbol just read is an operator, initialise the counter C with the number of

arguments of the operator and go to step 1.

3. If the symbol just read it is an operand, decrement C.
4. If C (cid:2)= 0, go to 1.
5. If C = 0, execute the following operations:

(a) Apply the last operator stored on the stack to the operands just pushed onto
the stack, storing the results in a register R, eliminate operator and operands
from the stack and store the value of R on the stack.

(b) If there is no operator symbol in the stack go to 6.
(c) Initialise the counter C to n − m, where n is the number of the argument of
the topmost operator on the stack, and m is number of operands present on the
stack above this operator.

(d) Go to 4.

6. If the sequence remaining to be read is not empty, go to 1.

The result of the evaluation is located on the stack when the algorithm ﬁnishes.
This algorithm assumes that we know in advance the number of operands required
by each operator. This requires that we syntactically distinguish unary from binary
operators. Furthermore, it is generally necessary to check that the stack contains
enough operands for the application of the operator (Step 5.(c) in the algorithm
above). This check is not required when using postﬁx notation, as we see below.

6.1 Expressions

Postﬁx Notation

123

The evaluation of expression in postﬁx notation is even simpler. In fact, we do not
need to check that all the operands for the last operator have been pushed onto
the stack, since the operands are read (from left to right) before the operators. The
evaluation algorithm is then the following (as usual, we assume that the symbol
sequence is syntactically correct and is not empty):

1. Read the next symbol in the expression and push it on the stack.
2. If the symbol just read is an operator apply it to the operands immediately below
it on the stack, store the result in R, pop operator and operands from the stack
and push the value in R onto the stack.

3. If the sequence remaining to be read is not empty, go to 1.
4. If the symbol just read is an operand, go to 1.

This algorithm also requires us to know in advance the number of operands

required by each operator.

6.1.3 Evaluation of Expressions

As we saw the start of the Chap. 2 and as we extensively discussed in that chapter,
expressions, like the other programming language constructs, can be conveniently
represented by trees. In particular, they can be represented by a tree (called the
expression’s syntax tree) in which:

• Every non-leaf node is labelled with an operator.
• Every subtree child of a node N is an operand for the operator associated with N .
• Every leaf node is labelled with a constant, variable or other elementary operand.

Trees of this kind can be directly obtained from the derivation trees of an (unam-
biguous) grammar for expressions, by eliminating non-terminal symbols and by an
appropriate rearrangement of the nodes. Given the tree representation, the linear inﬁx,
preﬁx, and postﬁx representations can be obtained by traversing the tree in a symmet-
ric, preﬁx, or postﬁx order, respectively. The representation of expressions as trees
clariﬁes (without needing parentheses) precedence and associativity of operators.
The subtrees found lower in the tree constitute the operands and therefore operators
at lower levels must be evaluated before those higher in the tree. For example the
tree shown in Fig. 6.1 represents the expression:

( a + f ( b ))*( c + f ( b ))

This expression can be obtained (parentheses apart) from the symmetric-order

traversal of the tree (f is here an arbitrary unary operation).

For languages with a compilative implementation, the parser implements syntactic
analysis by constructing a derivation tree. In the speciﬁc case of expressions then,
inﬁx representation in the source code is translated into a tree-based representation.

124

6 Control Structure

Fig. 6.1 An expression

∗

+

+

a

f

b

c

f

b

This representation is then used by successive phases of the compilation procedure to
generate the object code implementing runtime expressions evaluation. This object
code clearly depends on the type of machine for which the compiler is constructed.
In the case in which we have a traditional physical machine, for example, code of
a traditional kind (i.e. in the form opcode operand1 operand2) is generated
which uses registers as well as a temporary memory locations to store intermediate
results of evaluation.

In some particular cases, on the other hand, object code can be represented using a
preﬁx or postﬁx form which is subsequently evaluated by a stack architecture. This is
the case for example in the executable code for many implementations of SNOBOL4
programs.3

In the case of languages with an interpretative implementation, it is also convenient
to translate expressions, normally represented in the source code in inﬁx notation,
into a tree representation which can then be directly evaluated using a tree traversal.
This is the case, for example, in interpreted implementations of Lisp, where the entire
program is represented as a tree.

It is beyond the scope of the present text to go into details on mechanisms for
generating code or for evaluating expression in an interpreter. We only discuss below
some points which often cause ambiguity. For convenience, we will ﬁx on expressions
represented in inﬁx form. We will see that what we have to say applies equally to the
direct evaluation of expressions represented as a tree, as well as to code generation-
mechanisms.

Subexpression Evaluation Order

Inﬁx notation precedence and associativity rules (or the structure, when expressions
are represented as trees) do not say anything about the order to be used to evaluate
an operator’s operands (i.e., nodes at the same level). For example, in the expression
in Fig. 6.1, nothing tells us which among a+f(b) or c+f(b) should be evaluated
ﬁrst. Moreover, nothing is said about whether operands should be evaluated before
their operator; nor whether expressions that are mathematically equivalent can be

3 SNOBOL4 (“StriNg Oriented and symBOlic Language”) is a language for string manipulation of
the end of sixties, that had patterns as a ﬁrst-class data type. Patterns in SNOBOL may describe
arbitrary context-free grammars, as opposed to standard patterns of AWK, or Perl (the languages
that took the place of SNOBOL in the eighties), which describe instead regular languages.

6.1 Expressions

125

inter-substituted without modifying the result (for example, (a-b+c) and(a+c-b)
could be considered equivalent).

While in mathematical terms these differences are unimportant (the result does
not change), from our viewpoint these questions are relevant, for the following ﬁve
reasons.

Side effects

In imperative programming languages, expression evaluation can
modify the state through so-called side effects. A side effect is an action that
inﬂuences the result (partial or ﬁnal) of a computation without otherwise explic-
itly returning a value in the context in which it is found. The possibility of side
effects makes the order of evaluation relevant to the ﬁnal result. In our example in
Fig. 6.1, if the evaluation of the function f were to modify the value of its operand
through side effects, ﬁrst executing a+f(b) rather than c+f(b), could change
the value produced by the evaluation (see Exercise 1). As far as side effects are
concerned, languages follow various approaches. On the one hand, pure declar-
ative languages do not permit side effects at all. In imperative languages, the
most common case is that the presence of side effects is permitted, and hence
the value of an expression depends on the evaluation order. Java and Python, for
instance, state in their deﬁnition that evaluation always proceeds left-to-right. The
deﬁnition of C, on the other hand, does not specify any order, meaning that each
compiler may choose the order it deems more convenient.4

Finite arithmetic Given the set of numbers represented in a computer is ﬁnite
(see also Sect. 8.3), reordering expressions can cause overﬂow problems. For
example, if a has, as its value, the maximum integer representable and b and
c are positive numbers such that b > c, right-to-left evaluation of (a-b+c)
does not produce overﬂow, while we have an overﬂow from the evaluation from
left to right of (a+c-b). Moreover, even if there is no overﬂow, the limited
precision of computer arithmetic implies that changing the order of the operands
can lead to different results (this is particularly relevant in cases of ﬂoating point
computation).

Undeﬁned operands When the application of operator to operands is considered,
two evaluation strategies can be followed. The ﬁrst, called eager evaluation, con-
sists of ﬁrst evaluating all the operands and then applying the operator to the values
thus obtained. If we think of normal arithmetic operators, this strategy seems the
most reasonable. In programming languages, however, we have expressions pos-
ing problems which do not normally appears in arithmetic expressions. One of
the main issues is that an expression may be deﬁned and have a value even when
some of its components are undeﬁned. Let us consider a conditional expression
of the form:

a == 0 ? b : b / a

4 The deﬁnition of C does not even require that two copies of the same expression in a program are
evaluated using the same evaluation order.

126

6 Control Structure

We can write this in C to denote the value of b/a when a is non-zero and
b, otherwise. This expression results from the application of a single operator
(expressed in inﬁx notation using two binary operators ? and :) to three operands
(the boolean expression, a==0, and the two arithmetic expressions b and b/a).
We cannot use eager evaluation for such conditional expressions, because the
sub-expression b/a would have to be evaluated even when a is equal to zero,
producing an error.
In such a case, it is therefore better to use a lazy evaluation strategy which consists
of not evaluating operands before the application of the operator, but in passing
the un-evaluated operands to the operator, which, when it is evaluated, will decide
which operands are required, and will only evaluate the ones it requires.
The lazy evaluation strategy, used in some declarative languages, is more expen-
sive to implement than eager evaluation and for this reason, most languages use
eager evaluation (with the signiﬁcant exception of conditional expressions as
we will see below). There are languages which use a mix of both the techniques
(Algol, for example). We will discuss the various strategies for evaluating expres-
sions in greater detail when we consider functional languages in Chap. 11.

Short-circuit evaluation The problem detailed in the previous point presents
itself with particular clarity when evaluating Boolean expressions. For example,
consider the following expression (in C syntax):

a == 0 || b / a > 2

If the value of a is zero and both operands of || are evaluated, it is clear that an
error will result (in C, “||” denotes the logical operation of disjunction). To avoid
this problem, and to improve the efﬁciency of the code, C, like other languages
uses a form of lazy evaluation, also called short-circuiting evaluation, of boolean
expressions. If the ﬁrst operand of a disjunction has the value true then the second
is not evaluated, given that the overall result will certainly have the value true. In
such a case, the second expression is short-circuited in the sense that we arrive
at the ﬁnal value before knowing the value of all of the operands. Analogously, if
the ﬁrst operand of a conjunction has the value false, the second is not evaluated,
given that the overall result has value false.
The main reason for a short-circuit evaluation of Boolean operators is not efﬁ-
ciency, however. With full evaluation, certain common program schemata would
be incorrect, or require baroque coding. Let us make an example in Pascal, which
does not use short-circuit evaluation: the linear scan of a sequential list.

p := list ;
w h i l e ( p <> nil ) and ( pˆ. value <> 3) do

p := pˆ. next ;

The intention of this code is to traverse a list until we have arrived at the end
or until we have encountered the value 3. However, this is badly written code
that can produce a runtime error. In the case in which we have p = nil, the
second operand of the conjunction (pˆ.value <> 3) yields an error when it
dereferences a null pointer. Similar code, on the other hand, mutatis mutandis,
can be written in C without causing problems. In order to avoid ambiguity, some

6.2 The Concept of Command

127

languages (for example C and Ada), explicitly provide different boolean operators
for short-circuit evaluation.5 Finally, it should be noted that this kind of evaluation
can be simulated using a conditional command (see Exercise 2).

Optimisation

Frequently, the order evaluation of subexpressions inﬂuences the
efﬁciency of the evaluation of an expression for reasons relating to the organisation
of the physical machine. For example, consider the following code:

a = v e c t o r [ i ];
b = a * a + c * d ;

In the second expression, it is probably better ﬁrst to evaluate c*d, given that the
value of a has to be read from memory (with the ﬁrst instruction) and might not be
yet available; in such a case, the processor would have to wait before calculating
a*a. In some cases, the compiler can change the order of operands in expressions
to obtain more efﬁcient, but semantically equivalent, code.

The last point explains many of the semantic problems that appear while evaluating
expressions. Given the importance of the efﬁciency of the object code, it could be
wise to give liberty to the compiler in the use of the expression evaluation method,
without it being speciﬁed at the level of the semantic description of the language.
This is the reason why, as we already said, C does not specify an evaluation order.
On the other hand, with this under-speciﬁcation, different implementations of the
same language may produce different results for the same expression, or have errors
at runtime whose source is hard to determine. And this is the reason why other
languages, like Java or Python, do specify the evaluation order in their deﬁnition.

Wishing to capitalize in a pragmatic prescription what we have said so far, unless
we know very well the language we use and the speciﬁc implementation we are
using, it is wise to use all possible means to eliminate as many sources of ambiguity
as possible in expression evaluation (such as brackets, parentheses, speciﬁc boolean
operations, auxiliary variables in expressions, etc.).

6.2 The Concept of Command

If expressions are present in all programming languages, the same is not true for
commands. They are constructs that are typically present in so-called imperative
languages.

Deﬁnition 6.2 (Command) A command is a syntactic entity whose evaluation can
have a side effect, and does not necessarily return a value.

5 In Python, the special, short-circuit evaluation of Boolean operators is the reason why those
operators are not deﬁned in terms of “magic” methods, like any other operator.

128

6 Control Structure

A command, or more generally, any other construct, has a side-effect if it inﬂu-
ences the result of the computation but its evaluation returns no value to the context
in which it is located. One of the simplest side effects is the one we obtain with
output commands. Let us suppose that the print command could be used to print
character strings supplied as argument. When the command print “pippo” is
evaluated, we will not obtain a value but only a side-effect—the characters “pippo”
appear on the output device.

The deﬁnition of command, just as the previous deﬁnition of expression, it is not
precise, given that we have referred to an informal concept of evaluation (the one
performed by the abstract machine of the language to which the command or the
expression belongs). It is clear that we can always modify the interpreter so that we
obtain some value as a result of the evaluation of a command. This is what happens
in some languages (for example in C, assignment also returns the value to the right
of =, see Sect. 6.2.2).

A precise deﬁnition and an exact distinction between expressions and commands
on the basis of their semantics is possible only in the setting of a formal deﬁnition of
a language. In Sect. 2.5, we saw a simple example. The evaluation of an expression,
given an initial state, produces both a value and a (possibly modiﬁed) state (to take
care of side effects inside the expression). On the other hand, the evaluation of a
command, given an initial state, is a new state, produced by the side effects of the
command itself. A command is therefore a construct whose purpose is the modiﬁ-
cation of the state, which, in the simple example of Sect. 2.5, takes into account the
value of all the variables of the program.

The assignment command is the elementary construct for modifying the state.

Before dealing with it, however, it is necessary to clarify the concept of variable.

6.2.1 The Variable

In mathematics, a variable is a symbol (a name) that stands for a value, taken from
some predetermined domain. In programming languages, it is still a name that rep-
resents an object, but the apparent simplicity of the concepts hides several subtleties.
Moreover, imperative languages use variables differently than logic and functional
languages (see Sects. 11.1 and 12.3).

The ﬁrst notion we deal with is that of modiﬁable variable, common to most
imperative programming languages. A modiﬁable variable is a name that represents
(stands for) a “piece of mutable store”, a sort of container, or location (clearly refer-
ring to physical memory). The location contains a value (the “value of the variable)”,
which may change over time (whence the adjective “modiﬁable”), by the effect of
assignment commands.

We may represent modiﬁable variables as in Fig. 6.2. The name x stands for the
small box containing the value 3, which may be re-ﬁlled with other values. We stress
that the name and the container are two different entities, although we usually say
“the variable x” for “the container whose name is x”.

6.2 The Concept of Command

129

Fig. 6.2 A modiﬁable
variable

Fig. 6.3 The reference
model for a variable

x

3

x

3

Not all imperative languages use modiﬁable variables. In some of them, a variable
is a name for a reference (that is, a mechanism allowing access) to a value.6 When this
is the case, we will say that a language uses a reference model of variables.7 We may
represent a variable in the reference model as in Fig. 6.3. Imperative languages with
a reference model may have containers as values, thus allowing for side effects like
the ones that are possible with the modiﬁable variable. Languages using a reference
model include Python, Scala, and Java (only for class types).

Modiﬁable variables and variables in reference model behave differently in the

context of the assignment command, as we will see in the next section.

(Pure) functional languages (see Sect. 11.1) use a concept of variable similar to
the mathematical one—a variable is a name that stands for a value. It is often said
that functional languages “do not have variables”, meaning that (in their pure forms)
they do not have modiﬁable variables (or, equivalently, they have a reference model
where values cannot be containers.)

Logic languages also use names associated to values as variables and, as with
functional languages, once a link between a variable identiﬁer and a value is created,
it can never be eliminated. There is however a mode in which the value associated
with a variable can be modiﬁed without altering the link, as will be seen in Sect. 12.3.

6.2.2 Assignment

Assignment is the basic command for the “modiﬁcation of a variable”, that is, for
changing the value (or the content) associated with a name. It is the most elementary
command in every imperative language; still, there are various subtleties to be taken
into account.

Let us ﬁrst treat the case of the modiﬁable variable. In Pascal one may write

X := 2

to indicate that the variable X is assigned the value 2. After this command the
container associated with the variable (whose name is) X contains the value 2 in
place of the value that was there before. Since the command does not return any
value, we say that the effect of the assignment is a “side effect”. From now on, the

6 A reference is the abstract version of a pointer, Sect. 8.4.6.
7 One of the earliest languages to use this model is CLU, where it was called the “object model” [1].
We borrow the term “reference model” from [2].

130

6 Control Structure

use of X (“an access to X”) will return the value 2. Moreover, the value previously
stored in the container is lost. Consider now the command

X := X +1

which assign to X its previous value incremented by 1. The same name, X, is used
with a different meaning on the two sides of the assignment operator. The X on the
left of the := symbol is used to indicate the container (the location) to be used for
storing the new value. The occurrence of X on the right of the := denotes the value
inside the container.

We thus distinguish two kind of values: l-values are those values that indicate
locations and therefore are the values of expressions that can be on the left of an
assignment command. On the other hand, r-values are the values that can be stored
in locations, and therefore are the values of expressions that can appear on the right
of an assignment command. If the language has a reference model for variables,
l-values denote references, and not locations.

Assignment Semantics: Modiﬁable Variables Versus Reference
Model

The assignment command has the form of a binary operator in inﬁx form:

exp1 OpAss exp2

where OpAss indicates the symbol used in the particular language to denote assign-
ment (e.g., := in Pascal, = in C, FORTRAN, Python and Java, ← in APL, etc.).
The semantics of such a command, in the case of modiﬁable variables, include the
following steps: compute the l-value of exp1, determining a container loc; compute
the r-value of exp2, obtaining a value val; modify the contents of loc by substituting
val for the one previously there.8

In the case of the reference model for variables, instead, we may describe the
semantics of the same assignment as follows: compute the l-value of exp1, deter-
mining a reference ref ; compute the r-value of exp2, obtaining a value val; change
the reference ref, so that now it refers to val. Note that val is not copied (duplicated)
as it happens for the modiﬁable variable.

The different behavior in the two models becomes clearer if we consider an assign-

ment between two variables:

x = y ;

Under the modiﬁable variable model, the value “contained” in y is copied into the
container for x. Under the reference model, instead, after the assignment x and y
are two references to the same object (we have an aliasing situation). The behavior
of assignment in the two contexts is graphically represented in Fig. 6.4.

8 The order in which these operations are performed—relevant in case exp1 or exp2 have side
effects—is language speciﬁc. For example, Java allows the left-hand side to be evaluated before the
right-hand side; C leaves this decision to the implementation (and then the same code could have
different effects on different implementations); Python guarantees that exp2 is evaluated before
exp1.

6.2 The Concept of Command

131

Fig. 6.4 Assignment:
modiﬁable variable (top) vs
reference model (bottom)

As we said in the previous section, in the reference model we may have names
that refer to containers (for example, records, or arrays, or instances of classes, etc.)
If this is the case, after the assignment x=y; a modiﬁcation performed on a value
(a container) accessed using the name x becomes visible also through the name y,
and vice versa.

Below, unless otherwise speciﬁed, when we talk about variables, we mean the

modiﬁable variable.

Variations on the Theme

Which expressions denote (on the left of an assignment) an l-value depends on the
programming language: the usual cases are variables, array elements, record ﬁelds
(note that, as a consequence, calculation of an l-value can be arbitrarily complex
because it could involve function calls, for example when determining an array
index).

In some languages, for example C, assignment both produces a side effect, and

returns the r-value computed for the right-hand side. Thus, in C the evaluation of

x = 2;

in addition to assigning 2 to x, returns the value 2. Therefore we can also write:

y = x = 2;

which should be interpreted as:

( y = ( x = 2));

This command assigns the value 2 to x as well as to y.

Forms of “chained assignment” are possible also in languages where assignment

does not return a value. This is the case of Python,9 where a chained assignment

x = y = exp

is equivalent to (note that the leftmost name is assigned ﬁrst)

9 Python 3.8 introduces assignment expressions: name:=exp returns the value of exp and assign
this value to name. Unless parenthesized, however, it cannot be used in all the contexts where a
normal assignment (=) is used (e.g., at the top level, or in a chained assignment).

132

tmp = exp
x = temp
y = temp

6 Control Structure

Python also allows simultaneous multiple assignment, coherently with the presence
of tuples as primitive data types:

x , y = exp1 , exp2

evaluates ﬁrst exp1 and exp2, determining two values v1 and v2; then assigns v1
to x and v2 and y. Observe that

x , y =y , x

swaps the values associated to x and y.

In many languages (C and its descendants, Java, Python, and others) we ﬁnd
also augmented (or compound) assignments , to increase code readability or avoid
unforeseen side effects. The usual assignment for incrementing a variable

x = x +1;

requires, in principle, two accesses to the variable x: one to determine the l-value,
and one to obtain the r-value. Even if this can easily optimised by a compiler, it
remains an issue in presence of side-effects. Let us consider the code:

a [ f ()] = a [ f ( ) ] + 1 ;

where a is a vector (of at least 3 elements) and f is a function deﬁned as follows:

b = 0;
int f (){

if b == 0{
b =1;
r e t u r n 1;
}

e l s e r e t u r n 2;

}

This function is deﬁned in such a way that the non-local reference to b in the body
of f refers to and modiﬁes the global b. But then

a [ f ()] = a [ f ( ) ] + 1

does not increment the value of an element of a. Instead, it assigns the value of
a[1]+1 to a[2] whenever the evaluation of the right-hand side of the assignment
precedes the evaluation of the left-hand side.10 Moreover, the compiler cannot opti-
mise the computation (with a single call to f), because the programmer might have
wanted this apparently anomalous behaviour.

Augmented assignments come to help on this subject. In the example above we

could write

10 It assigns the value of a[2]+1 to a[1] whenever the evaluation of the left-hand side precedes
the evaluation of the right-hand side.

6.2 The Concept of Command

133

Environment and Memory
In Chap. 2, we deﬁned the semantics of a command by referring to a simple notion of state, which
we deﬁned as a function that assigns to each variable present in the program the value it takes. This
concept of state, although adequate for didactic purposes in mini-languages, is not sufﬁcient when
we want to describe the semantics of real programming languages which use modiﬁable variables
and assignments. In fact, we have already seen in Chap. 4 (and will see in more detail in the next
two chapters) that parameter-passing mechanisms as well as pointers can easily create situations
in which two different names, for example X and Y, refer to the same variable, or rather the same
location in memory. Such case of aliasing cannot be described using a simple function State: Names
→ Values because with a simple function it is not possible to express the fact that a modiﬁcation of
the value associated with (the variable denoted by) X also reﬂects on the value associated with Y.
To correctly express the meaning of modiﬁable variables, we therefore use two separate functions.
The ﬁrst, called the environment, mostly corresponds to the concept of environment introduced
in Chap. 4: in other words, it is a function Environment: Names → DenotableValues which maps
names to the values they denote. The set (or, as one says in semantics jargon, the domain) of names
often coincides with that of identiﬁers. The domain DenotableValues, instead, includes all values
to which a name can be given; what these values are depends on the programming language but if
the language provides modiﬁable variables then this domain certainly includes memory locations.
The values associated with locations are, on the other hand, expressed by a function Memory:
Locations → StorableValues which (informally) associates every location with the value stored in
it. In this case also, what exactly is a storable value depends on the speciﬁc language.

Therefore, when we say that “in the current state the variable X has the value 5”, formally
we mean to say that we have an environment ρ and a memory σ such that σ (ρ(X)) = 5. Note
that when a variable is understood to be an l-value, we are interested only in the location denoted
by the name and, therefore, only the environment is used, while when we understand it as an r-
value the store is also used. For example given an environment ρ, and a store σ , the effect of the
command X=Y is to produce a new state in which the value of ρ(σ (Y)) is associated with ρ(X). Let
us recall, for completeness, that a third value domain important in the language semantics are the
ExpressibleValues: these are those values which can be the result of the evaluation of a complex
expression.

a [ f ()] += 1;

for saying that we want to call f() once, and then increment a[f()] by one.
Augmented assignments come with a variety of possible operations (+=, -=, etc.).
In all languages, the left-hand side is evaluated only once.11

11 It is language speciﬁc the time when the left-hand side is evaluated. It is interesting that in Python,
while in a standard assignment X=exp, the right-hand side is evaluated before the left-hand side,
in an augmented assignment X+=exp it is the left-hand side to be evaluated ﬁrst.

134

6 Control Structure

Imperative and Declarative Languages

Denotable, storable and expressible values, even if they have a non-empty intersection, are concep-
tually distinct sets. In effect, many important differences between various languages depend on how
these domains are deﬁned. For example, functions are denotable but not expressible in Pascal, while
they are expressible in Lisp, ML, and Python. A particularly important difference between various
languages concerns the presence of storable values and the Memory semantic function which we
saw in the previous box. In fact, in a rather synthetic fashion, we can classify as imperative those
languages which have environments as well as memory functions; those languages which have
only environments are declarative. Imperative languages, while they are high-level languages, are
inspired by the physical structure of the computer. In them the concept of memory (or state) is inter-
preted as the set of associations between memory locations and values stored in those locations.
A program, according to this paradigm, is a set of imperative commands and computation consists
of a sequence of steps which modify the state, using as its elementary command the assignment.
The terminology “imperative” here has to do with natural language: as in an imperative phrase, we
say “take that apple” to express a command, so with an imperative command we can say “assign
to x the value 1”. Most programming languages normally used belong to the imperative paradigm
(Fortran, Algol, Pascal, C, etc.).

Declarative languages were introduced with the aim of offering higher level programming
paradigms, close to the notations of mathematics and logic, abstracting from the characteristics of the
physical machine on which the programs are executed. In declarative languages (or at least in “pure”
versions of them) there are no commands to modify the state, given that there are neither modiﬁable
variables nor a semantic memory function. Programs are formed from a set of declarations (from
which the name is derived) of functions or relations which deﬁne new values. According to the
elementary mechanism used to specify the characteristics of the result, declarative languages are
divided into two classes: functional and logic programming languages (the latter, also called logic
languages for short). In the ﬁrst case, computation consists of the evaluation of functions deﬁned
by the programmer using rules of a mathematical kind (mostly composition and application). In
the second form of declarative language, on the other hand, computation is based on ﬁrst-order
logical deduction. Let us recall that there exist “impure” functional and logic languages that also
have imperative characteristics (in particular, they include assignment).

6.3 Sequence Control Commands

Assignment is the basic command in imperative languages (and in “impure” declara-
tive languages); it expresses the elementary computation step. Most other commands
deﬁne sequence control, that is, are used to specify the order in which state modi-
ﬁcations produced by assignments are to be performed. These other commands can
be divided into three categories:

Commands for explicit sequence control These are the sequential command and
goto. We treat in this category also the composite command, which allows us to
consider a group of commands as a single one.

6.3 Sequence Control Commands

135

A Quibble About “;”

Being rigorous, the “;” used to separate commands is not always a sequential command. In C, C++
and Java, for example, it is a command terminator more than an operator expressing concatenation.
In fact, this can be easily seen when we deal with the last command in a block. In these languages,
the “;” is always required, even if the command is not followed by another as in

{ x =1;

x = x +1;

}

In languages like Pascal, on the other hand, “;” is really an operator that sequentialises commands.
The same example as above can be written as:

b e g i n

x :=1;
x := x +1

end

To insert a “;” without there being a command to follow it is, however, a venial programming sin
which the compiler absolves by inserting an empty command between the “;” and the end. An
empty command is not denoted by anything in the syntax and does not correspond to any action.

Conditional (or selection) commands These are the commands that allow the
speciﬁcation of alternative paths that the competition can take. They depend on
the satisfaction of speciﬁc conditions.

Iterative commands These allow a given command to be repeated a pre-deﬁned

number of times or until certain conditions are met.

6.3.1 Commands for Explicit Sequence Control

Sequential Command

The sequential command, indicated in many languages by a “;”, allows us to specify
the sequential execution of two commands. If we write:

C1 ; C2

the execution of C2 starts after C1 terminates. In languages in which the evaluation of
a command also returns a value, the value returned by the evaluation of the sequential
command is that of the second argument.

Obviously we can write a sequence of commands such as:

C1 ; C2 ; ... ; Cn

with the implicit assumption that the operator “;” associates to the left.

136

6 Control Structure

Composite Command

The composite command groups a sequence of commands into a single one. It is
expressed by suitable delimiters such as those used by Algol:

b e g i n
...
end

or those in C, Scala, Java:

{
...
}

Python expresses grouping of commands by the positive indentation of those com-
mands.

Such a composite command, also called a block, can be used in any context in
which a simple command is expected and therefore, in particular, can be used inside
another composite command to create a tree-like structure of arbitrary complexity.

Goto

The goto command occupies a unique place in the panorama of sequential control
commands. It was part of the ﬁrst programming languages and still continues to
be included in many used languages. This command is directly inspired by jump
instructions in assembler languages and therefore by the sequence control of the
hardware machine. The execution of the command

goto A

transfers control to the point in the program at which the label A occurs (different
languages differ in what exactly constitutes a label but these differences are not
relevant to us).

Despite its apparent simplicity and naturalness, the goto command has been at
the centre of a considerable debate since the start of the 1970s (see, for example, a
famous article by Dijkstra referred to in the bibliography), between its supporters
and its detractors, who in the end won the match. To clarify the sense of this debate,
let us, ﬁrst of all, observe that the goto is not essential to the expressiveness of
a programming language. A theorem due to Böhm and Jacopini in fact shows that
any program can be translated into an equivalent one which does not use the goto
(the formulation of the theorem, obviously, is much more precise than our account).
This result, however, does not come down on one side or the other. On the one hand,
we may use the theorem to assert that the goto is useless. On the other hand, we
may observe that the transformations used by the theorem to obtain a goto-less
program, completely destroy the structure of the original program. Hence, goto is
“in principle” useless, but at the price of writing artiﬁcially complex programs.

The nexus of the question really is not of a theoretical nature but of a pragmatic one.
Using goto, it is easily possible to write code which soon becomes incomprehensible
and which still remains incomprehensible when all gotos are eliminated. We can
think, for example, of a program of some considerable size where we have inserted

6.3 Sequence Control Commands

137

jumps between points which are some of thousands of lines of code apart. Or, we
can think of a subprogram in which exits are made at different points based on some
condition and the exits are performed by gotos. These and other arbitrary uses of this
construct make the code hard to understand, and therefore hard to modify, correct and
maintain; this has the obvious negative consequences in terms of cost. To all of this,
we can add the fact that the goto with its primitive method of transferring control,
does not accord well with other mechanisms present in high-level languages. What
happens, for example, if we jump inside of a block? When and how is the activation
record for this block initialised so that everything works correctly?

If goto were used in an extremely controlled fashion, locally to small regions
of code, the majority of these disadvantages would disappear. However, the cases
in which it can be useful to use this command, such as exit from loops, return from
a subprograms, handling of exceptions, can, in modern programming languages, be
handled by speciﬁc, more appropriate, constructs. We can therefore assert that in
modern high-level languages, the goto is just an archeological relic. Java has been
the ﬁrst commercial language to not include goto into its set of commands. It has
been followed by most other recent languages.

Other Sequence Control Commands

If goto is dangerous in its general form, there are local and limited uses of it which
are useful in given circumstances. Many languages make available limited forms of
jump to confront these pragmatic necessities without having to make use of the brute
force of a goto. Among these commands (which take on different forms in different
languages), we ﬁnd constructs such as break (for terminating the execution of a
loop, of a case, or, in some languages, of the current block), continue (for
terminating the current iteration in an iterative command and force the starting of
next iteration) or return (to terminate the evaluation of the function, returning
control to the caller, sometimes also passing a value).

Finally, a more elaborate sequence control can be implemented using exceptions,

which will be treated in Sect. 7.3.

6.3.2 Conditional Commands

Conditional commands, or selection commands, express one alternative between
two or more possible continuations of the computation, based on appropriate logical
conditions. We can divide conditional commands into two groups.

If

The if command is present in almost all languages, in various syntactic forms which
can be reduced to the form:

if Bexp then C1 else C2

where Bexp is a boolean expression, and C1 and C2 are commands. Informally,
the semantics of such a command expresses an alternative in the execution of the

138

6 Control Structure

computation, based on the evaluation of the expression Bexp. When this evaluation
returns true, the command C1 is executed, otherwise the command C2 is executed.
The command is often present in the form without the else branch:

if Bexp then C1

In this case, too, if the condition is false, the command C1 is not executed and
control passes to the command immediately after the conditional. As we saw in
Chap. 2, nesting several if as in the command

if B e x p 1 if B e x p 2 then C1 else C2

causes problems of ambiguity, which can be resolved using a suitable grammar which
formally describes the rules adopted by the language (for example, the else branch
belongs to the innermost if; this is the rule used in almost every language). To
avoid problems of ambiguity, some languages use a “terminator” to indicate where
the conditional command ends, as for example in:

if Bexp then C1 else C2 e n d i f

Furthermore, in some cases, instead of using a list of nested if then elses,

use is made of an if equipped with more branches, analogous to the following:

if B e x p 1 then C1

e l s e i f B e x p 2 then C2
...
e l s e i f B e x p n then Cn
else

Cn +1

e n d i f

The implementation of the conditional command poses no problems, and makes use
of instructions for test and jump that are found in the underlying physical machine.12

Case

The case command is a specialisation of the if command, with more branches. In
its simplest form it is written as follows:

case Exp

of

l a b e l 1 : C1 ;
l a b e l 2 : C2 ;
...
l a b e l n : Cn ;

else Cn +1

where Exp is an expression whose value is of a type compatible with that of the
labels label1, ... , labeln, while C1, ... , Cn+1 are commands. Each label
is represented by one or more constants and the constant used in different labels are
different from each other. The type permitted for labels, as well as their form, varies

12 At the assembly language level, and therefore in the language of the physical machine, there are
jump operations, conditional or not, analogous to the goto in high-level languages.

6.3 Sequence Control Commands

139

from language to language. In most cases, a discrete type is permitted (see Sect. 8.3),
including enumerations and intervals. So, for example, we can use the constants 2
and 4 to denote a label, but in some languages we can also write 2,4 to indicate
either the value 2 or the value 4, or 2 .. 4 to indicate all values between 2 and 4
(inclusive).

The meaning of this command is analogous to that of a multi-branch if. Once
the expression Exp has been evaluated to a value v, the command which occurs in
the unique branch whose label includes v is executed. The else branch is executed
whenever there is no branch containing v in the label.

Whatever can be done using a case can certainly be expressed using a nested
series of ifs. Even so, many languages include some form of case in their commands,
either to improve the readability of the code, or because it is possible to compile a
case much more efﬁciently than a long series of nested ifs. A case is, in fact,
implemented in assembly language using a vector of contiguous cells called a jump
table, in which each element of the table contains the address of the ﬁrst instruction of
the corresponding command in the case’s branches. The use of such a table is shown
in Fig. 6.5, where, for simplicity, it is assumed that the labels label1,.., labeln
are the consecutive constants 0, 1, . . . , n − 1. As should be clear in the ﬁgure, the
expression which appears as an argument to the case is evaluated ﬁrst of all. The

Fig. 6.5 Implementation of
case

140

6 Control Structure

value thus obtained is then used as an offset (index) to compute the position in the
jump table of the instruction which performs the jump to the chosen branch. The
extension of this mechanism to the general case in which labels are sets or intervals
is simple (see Exercise 3).

This implementation mechanism for case gives greater efﬁciency than a series
of nested ifs. Using a jump table, once the value of the expression is calculated,
two jump instructions are required to arrive at the code of the command to execute.
Using nested ifs, on the other hand, for n alternative branches (in the worst case of
an unbalanced if), it is necessary to evaluate O(n) conditions and perform O(n)
jumps before arriving at the command of interest. The disadvantage of using a jump
table is that, since it is a linear structure whose contiguous elements correspond
to successive label values, it can consume a lot of space when the label values are
dispersed over a fairly wide interval or when the individual labels are a type denoting
a wide interval. In this case alternative methods can be used for calculating the jump
address, such as sequential tests hashing or methods based on binary search.

Different languages exhibit signiﬁcant differences in their case commands. In
C, for example, the switch has the following syntax (also to be found in C++ and
in Java):

s w i t c h ( Exp ) body

where body can be any command. In general, though, the body is formed from a
block in which some commands can be labelled; that is they are of the form:

case l a b e l : command

while the last command of the block is of the form:

d e f a u l t : command

When the expression Exp is evaluated to v, the control is transferred to the com-
mand whose label is v; if there are no labels with such a value, control passes to
the command with the label default. If there is no default command, control
passes to the ﬁrst command following the switch. Observe that, with this seman-
tics, once the branch of the switch has been selected, control then ﬂows into the
immediately following branches. To obtain a construct with semantics analogous to
that of the case we discussed above, it is necessary to insert an explicit control
transfer at the end of the block, using a break:

s w i t c h ( Exp ){

case l a b e l 1 : C1 b r e a k ;
case l a b e l 2 : C2 b r e a k ;
...
case l a b e l n : Cn b r e a k ;
d e f a u l t : Cn +1 b r e a k ;

}

If the value of Exp does not appear in any label, the entire command has no effect.
Finally, lists or ranges of values are not permitted as labels. This however is no real
limitation, given that lists of values can be obtained by exploiting the fact that control

6.3 Sequence Control Commands

141

passes from one branch to its successor when break is omitted. If, for example, we
write:

s w i t c h ( Exp ){
case 1:
case 2: C2 b r e a k ;
case 3: C3 b r e a k ;
d e f a u l t : C4 b r e a k ;

}

the command C2 is executed when Exp has value 1 or 2.

6.3.3 Iterative Commands

With the exception of goto, all the commands that we have seen up to this point
only allow us to express ﬁnite computations, whose maximum length is determined
statically by the length of the program text.13 A language which had only such
commands would be of highly limited expressiveness. It would certainly not be
Turing complete (recall Sect. 3.3), in that it would not permit the expression of all
possible algorithms (consider, for example, scanning a vector of n elements, where
n is not known a priori).

In low-level languages, the expressive power to express all possible algorithms is
obtained through jump instructions, allowing the repetition of groups of instructions
by jumping back to the start of the code. In high-level languages, avoiding the goto
command, two basic mechanisms are employed to achieve the same effect: structured
iteration and recursion. The ﬁrst, which we consider in this section, is more familiar
from imperative languages (they almost always allow recursion as well). Suitable
linguistic constructs (which we can regard as special versions of the jump command)
allow us to implement loops in which commands are repeated or iterated. At the
linguistic level, we distinguish between unbounded iteration and bounded iteration.
In bounded iteration, repetition is implemented by constructs that allow a determinate
number of iterations, usually ﬁxed before the iteration starts. In unbounded iteration,
on the other hand, repetition is controlled by whether a condition becomes true.
Bounded and unbounded iteration have different expressive power, at least in their
“pure” form.

Recursion, which we will consider in the next section, allows the expression of
loops in an implicit fashion, by allowing a function to call itself, thereby repeating
its own body an arbitrary number of times. The use of recursion is more common in
declarative languages (in many functional and logic languages there is no iterative
construct).

13 It can easily be seen that the maximum length of the computation is a linear function of the length
of the program.

142

6 Control Structure

Unbounded Iteration

Unbounded iteration is logically controlled iteration. It is implemented by linguistic
constructs composed of two parts: a loop condition (or guard) and a body, which is
a (possibly compound) command. When executed, the body is repeatedly executed
until the guard becomes false (or true, according to the construct).

The most common form of unbounded iteration is that of the while command,

originally introduced in Algol:

w h i l e ( Bexp ) do C

The meaning of this command is as follows: (1) the boolean expression Bexp is
evaluated; (2) if this evaluation returns the value true, execute the command C and
return to (1); otherwise the while command terminates.

In some languages there are also commands that test the condition after execution
of the command (which is therefore always executed at least once). This construct
is for example present in Pascal in the following form:

r e p e a t C u n t i l Bexp

which can be seen as an abbreviation for:

C ;
w h i l e not Bexp do C

(not Bexp here indicates the negation of the expression Bexp). In C an analogous
construct is do:

do C w h i l e ( Bexp )

which corresponds to:

C ;
w h i l e Bexp do C

(note that the guard is not negated as in the case of repeat.)

The while construct is simple to implement, given that it corresponds directly to
a loop that is implemented on the physical machine using a conditional jump instruc-
tion. This simplicity of implementation should not deceive us about the power of
this construct. A programming language which contains only assignment, condi-
tional commands, and unbounded iteration is Turing complete. Our mini-language
from Chap. 2 is therefore Turing complete (or: it allows the implementation of all
computable functions). The same is not the case with bounded iteration which we
will now turn to.

Bounded Iteration

Bounded iteration (sometimes also called numerically controlled iteration) is imple-
mented by linguistic constructs that are more complex than those used for unbounded
iteration; their semantics is also more elaborate. Moreover, only few programming
languages have the “pure” forms of bounded iteration that we are going to describe.
The model that we adopt in this discussion is that of Algol, which was then adopted
by many other languages of the same family (but not by C or Java).

6.3 Sequence Control Commands

143

Bounded iteration is expressed using some variant of the for command. It can

be described as:

for I = s t a r t to end by step do

body

where I is a variable, called the index, or counter, or control variable; start and
end are two expressions (for simplicity we can assume that they are of integer type
and, in general, they must be of a discrete type); step is a (compile-time) non-zero
integer constant; body is the command we want to repeat. This construct, in the
“pure” form we are describing, is subject to the important static semantic constraint
that the control variable can not be modiﬁed (either explicitly nor implicitly) during
the execution of the body.

The semantics of the bounded iteration construct can be described informally as

follows (assuming that step is positive):

1. The expression start is evaluated, as is end. The values are frozen and saved,
so that the programmer cannot modify them. We denote them, respectively, as
start_save and end_save.

2. I is initialised with the value of start_save.
3. If the value of I is strictly greater than the value of end_save, execution of the

for command is terminated.

4. Execute body and increment I by the value of step.
5. Go to 3.

In the case in which step is negative, the test in step (3) determines whether I

is strictly less than end_save.

It is worth emphasising the importance of step (1) above and the constraint that
the control variable cannot be modiﬁed in the body. Their combined effect is to
determine—before the loop begins execution—the number of times the body will be
executed. This number is given by the quantity, ic (iteration count), which is deﬁned
as:

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

ic =

end − start + step
step

if the right hand side is positive, otherwise ic is 0. It can be seen, ﬁnally, that there
is no way of producing an inﬁnite cycle with this construct.

There are considerable differences, both syntactic and semantic, between the ver-
sions of this construct in different languages. First, not all languages require non-
modiﬁability of the control variable and/or the freezing of the control expressions.
Strictly speaking, such cases do not implement bounded iteration because they are
unable to compute ic once and once only. It is common, though, to continue speaking
of bounded iteration even when the language does not guarantee determinateness (in
this case it is the programmer who must enforce determinateness, by not modifying
either directly or indirectly the control variable, the start, end, and step expressions).
Also several other aspects constitute important differences between languages, of
which we mention four:

144

6 Control Structure

Number of iterations According to the semantics which we have just given, when
step is positive, if the value of start is initially (strictly) greater than the value
of end, body is not executed at all. This is the case for most languages, although
some of them execute the test in Step 3 only after having executed once body.
Step The requirement that step is a (non-zero) constant is necessary for statically
determining its sign, so that the compiler can generate the appropriate code for
the test in step 3. Some languages (such as Pascal and Ada) use a special syntax
to indicate that step is negative, for example using downto or reverse in
place of to. Other languages, such as some versions of Fortran, do not have a
different syntax for the negative step. They instead implement for directly using
the iteration counter rather than the test of I and end. The value ic is computed
and if this value is positive, it is used to control the loop, decrementing it by 1
until it reaches the value 0. If, on the other hand, ic has a negative value or is equal
to 0, the loop is never repeated. It is the use of this implementation technique that
suggests the name numerically controlled iteration.

Final index value Another subtle aspect concerns the value of the control variable
I after the end of the loop. In many languages, I is a variable that is also visible
outside of the loop. What is then its value outside the body, immediately after the
loop terminates? One natural approach could be to let I maintain the last value
assigned to it during execution of the for. Following the semantics we described
above, and assuming that the loop terminates normally and the step is positive, the
last value assigned to the index I is the ﬁrst value greater than end. This choice,
however, can generate type ambiguities or errors. Let us assume, for example,
that I is declared of an interval type 1..10 (from 1 to 10). If we use a command:

for I = 1 to 10 by 1 do

body

the ﬁnal value assigned to I would be 11, which is not an admissible value in
the interval 1..10. An analogous problem occurs for integer values when the
calculation of I causes an overﬂow. To avoid this problem, some languages (for
example Fortran IV or Pascal) consider the value of I to be indeterminate on
termination of the loop (that is, the language deﬁnition does not specify what it
should be). In other words, each implementation of these languages is allowed
to behave how it wishes, with the imaginable consequence of the non-portability
of programs. Other languages (for example: Algol W, Algol 68, Ada, and,
in certain circumstances, C++) cut the matter short, decreeing that the control
variable is a variable that is local to the for; hence it is not visible outside the
loop. In this case the header of the for implicitly declares the control variable
with a type that is determined from that one of start and end. Still another
choice is the one made by Python, in which the control variable is visibile outside
the loop, with the value it had during the last meaningful iteration (in the example
above, I would have value 10 after termination of the loop).

Jump into a loop The last point which merits attention concerns the possibility of
jumping into the middle of a for loop using a goto command. Most languages
forbid such jumps for clear semantic reasons, while there are fewer restrictions
on the possibility of using a goto for jumping out of a loop.

6.3 Sequence Control Commands

145

We have just considered a number of important aspects of the implementation
of for loops. Particular tricks can be used by the compiler to optimise the code
that is produced (for example, eliminating tests which involve constants) or by lim-
iting overﬂow situations which could occur when the incrementing the index I (by
inserting appropriate tests).

Expressiveness of Bounded Iteration

Using bounded iteration, we can express the repetition of a command for n times,
where n it is an arbitrary value not known when the program is written, but is
ﬁxed when the iteration starts. It is clear that bounded iteration allows us to compute
functions that cannot be expressed using only conditional commands and assignment.
Despite this increase in expressive power, bounded iteration on its own is insufﬁcient
to make a programming language Turing complete. Think, for example, of a simple
function f which can be deﬁned as follows:

(cid:4)

f (x) =

if x is even,
x
does not terminate if x is odd.

Certainly such a function is computable. Every programmer knows how to imple-
ment it using a while or a goto or a recursive call to obtain a nonterminating
computation. However such a function is not representable in a language only hav-
ing assignment, sequential command, if and (true) bounded iteration. Indeed, in
such a language, all programs terminate for every input. In other words, in such a
language, only total functions can be deﬁned, while function f is partial.14 In order
to obtain a language that is Turing complete, it is necessary to include unbounded
iteration. The easy translation into machine language of while should not deceive
us. From a formal viewpoint, while is semantically more complicated than for.
As we saw in Chap. 2, the semantics of the while command is deﬁned in terms
of itself, something which, if at ﬁrst sight it appears a little strange, ﬁnds its formal
justiﬁcation in ﬁxed-point techniques which are beyond the scope of this text (and
to which we will mention in the section on recursion, below). Even if we have not
formally deﬁned the semantics of for, the reader can convince themselves that this
can be given in simpler terms (see Exercise 4). The major complication in the seman-
tics of while with respect to for corresponds to the greater expressiveness of the
ﬁrst construct. It is in fact clear that every for command can easily be translated
into a while.

It can now be asked why a language should provide a bounded iteration construct
when unbounded iteration constructs allow the same things to be done. The reply
is, once again, of a pragmatic nature. The for it is a much more compact form of
iteration—putting the three components of the iteration (initialisation, control and
increment of the control variable) on the same line makes understanding what the

14 There are also total functions that are not deﬁnable using only assignment, sequential composition,
if and for. The canonical example is the Ackerman function, for whose deﬁnition the reader is
referred to texts on computability theory for example [3].

146

6 Control Structure

loop does a lots easier. It can also prevent some common errors, such as forgetting the
initialisation, or the increment, of the control variable. The use of a for instead of a
while can therefore be an important way to improve understanding and, therefore
testing and maintenance of a program. There is also an implementation reason in
some languages and on some architectures. A for a loop can often be compiled in a
more efﬁcient way (and, in particular, be optimised better) than a while, particularly
as far as register allocation is concerned.

The for in C

In C (and in its successors, among them Java), the for is not a bounded iteration
construct. The general version is:

for (exp1 ; exp2 ; exp3 )

body

Its semantics is the following:

1. Evaluate exp1;
2. Evaluate exp2; if it is zero, terminate execution of the for;
3. Execute body;
4. Evaluate exp3 and go to (2).

The abstract machine does not freeze the value of the control expressions, nor is there
any ban on the possibility of modifying the value of index (which, in the general
case, need not even exist). It is clear how the semantics expresses that in C, for is
only an abbreviation for a while.15

Making use of the fact that, in C, a command is also an expression, we obtain the

most usual form in which the for appears in C programs:

for ( i = i n i t i a l ; i <= final ; i += step ){

body

}

This is an abbreviation of:

i = i n i t i a l ;
w h i l e ( i <= f i n a l ){

body
i += step ;

}

For-each

One of the most common iterative program schemata is the sequential traversal of a
data structure. For a typical example, let us consider a function computing the sum
of the elements of an integer array, in C:

15 An abbreviation which, putting in the same line initialisation, control and increment of the con-
trol variable, makes a program more readable, prevents some trivial mistakes, allows for easier
optimizations, etc.

6.3 Sequence Control Commands

147

int sum ( int [] A ){
int acc = 0;
for ( int i =0; i < l e n g t h ( A ); i ++)

acc += A [ i ];

r e t u r n acc ;

}

This function is full of details that the compiler knows: the ﬁrst and last index of A,
the speciﬁc check for i reaching its limit. The more detail that has to be added to a
construct, the easier it is to make an error, and the more difﬁcult to understand at a
glance what the construct does. In the case of sum, the essential is simple: execute
the body of the iteration to every element of A. Indexes, step, control on the bound
length(A), are all details that the compiler can obtain elsewhere.

Hence, some languages use a construct, called for-each, to perform this kind of

operation. The for-each has the following general syntax:

f o r e a c h (ControlVar : Expression) Command

The for-each construct expresses the repetition of Command (in which the Con-
trolVar can clearly appear) on each element of Expression, which must evaluate to
some form of sequence, or “iterable”.

The previous function can now be written as:

int sum ( int [] A ){
int acc = 0;
f o r e a c h ( int e : A )

acc += e ;

r e t u r n acc ;

}

We read the header of the iteration as “for every element e in A”. The vector index,
together with all of the vector’s limits, is hidden in a more synthetic and elegant
construct.

The use of the for-each construct is not limited to vectors, but can be applied
to all collections over which the notion of iteration can be deﬁned in a natural way. In
addition to enumerations and sets (which we will see in Chap. 8), let us mention the
particularly important case of languages which allow the user to deﬁne types which
are “iterable”.

Java (from version 5) supports the for-each construct. The keyword used is
simply for16 but the syntax is different and allows the construct to be disambiguated
without problem. In Java the for-each (also called enhanced for in the documentation)
is applicable to all subtypes of the library type Iterable.

16 The for-each construct has been added on the ﬂy when the language was already distributed and
in use for some years. In a case like this, the modiﬁcation of the set of reserved words is not a good
design decision. Old programs which used the new keyword would stop working.

148

6 Control Structure

The case of Python is particularly interesting, since in this language for-each is
primitive, and numerically controlled bounded iteration is a special case. A command

for name in exp :

body

evaluates ﬁrst exp to a value itval, which must be an iterable—that is an object
on which the predeﬁned function next is deﬁned (standard sequences like tuples
or lists are iterables, as it is an iterable range(start,end,step) which can
be used to perform a numerically controlled iteration). A reference to itval is
stored away, so that any further modiﬁcation to exp does not change the iterable
controlling the iteration. The body is then repeatedly executed: at the beginning
of each evaluation of the body, to name is assigned the value obtained by a call
to next(itval), thus neutralizing possible modiﬁcations to the value of name
that could occur inside body. When the iterable is “exhausted” (all values have
been generated), iteration terminates, and name maintains the last meaningful value
produced by next(itval). The reader will recognize in this steps a close analogue
of the semantics we detailed at the beginning of our treatment of bounded iteration.
If Python iterable were always immutable, this would be a true bounded iteration
(hence no divergent for loops). However, Python has mutable iterables—for instance,
lists. The semantics we outlined guarantees only that the identity of itval is not
modiﬁed during iteration. If itval is a mutable value (a container of some sort),
we may modify its value and concoct inﬁnite for loops.

6.4 Structured Programming

The rejection of the goto command during the 1970s was not an isolated phe-
nomenon. Indeed, it was only one issue among many that contributed to a much
wider debate which brought so-called structured programming to the fore. This can
be considered as the antecedent of modern programming methodology. As the name
itself suggests, it consists of a series of prescriptions aimed at allowing the devel-
opment of software with a certain structure in code and, correspondingly, in the
ﬂow of control. These prescriptions have both a methodological nature, providing
precise development methods for programs, and a linguistic component, suggesting
that languages should prefer only some typologies for the commands used (in sub-
stance, all those seen here so far, with the exception of goto). Let us see in more
detail some salient points about structured programming and its associated linguistic
implications.

Top-down or hierarchical design of programs The program is developed by
successive reﬁnements, starting from a ﬁrst (fairly abstract) speciﬁcation adding
successively extra detail at each step.

6.4 Structured Programming

149

Code modularisation

In a program, commands implementing to a speciﬁc feature
should all be grouped together. To do this, all the linguistic mechanisms made
available by the language are used. These range from compound commands to
constructs for abstraction, such as procedures, functions, and modules, where the
language supports them.

Use of meaningful names The use of meaningful names for variables, as well as
for procedures, etc., greatly simpliﬁes the process of understanding the code and
therefore eases making any changes required during maintenance. Even if this
appears (and is) obvious, in practice it is too often ignored.

Extensive use of comments Comments are essential for understanding, testing,
veriﬁcation, correction and modiﬁcation of code. A program with no comments,
becomes rapidly incomprehensible, once it has reached a certain length.

Use of structured data types The use of appropriate datatypes, for example
records, to group and structure information, even if it is of an heterogeneous
type, eases both the design of code and its later maintenance. For example, if we
can use the single variable, of type student record, to store the information about
family name, registration number and a subscription year for a student, then the
structure of the program will be much clearer than it would be if one had to use
four different variables to hold the information about a single student.

Use of structured control constructs This, from a linguistic viewpoint, is the
essential aspect. To implement structured programming, it is necessary to use
structured control constructs, which can be characterized as those having a single
entry and a single exit point.

The last point is the one which interests us the most and merits extra study. The
essential idea behind structured control constructs is that, by having a single entry
and a single exit point, they allow structuring of the code in which the linear scanning
of the program text corresponds to execution ﬂow. If command C2 textually follows
command C1, at the (unique) exit of command C1, when C1 terminates, control
passes to the (unique) entry point of command C2. Each command internally can
have complex structure: branching (as in an if) or loops (as in for) with a non-
linear control structure or internal jumps. The important thing is that each elementary
component, externally, is visible in terms only of an entry point and an exit. This
property, which is fundamental for the understanding of code, is violated in the
presence of a command such as goto which allows jumps forward and backwards
in the program. In such a case, the code can rapidly reach a state which is called
“spaghetti code”, where the control ﬂow between the various program components,
instead of being a simple graph with few edges (which connect the output of a
command to the input of the following one), is described by a graph in which the
edges resemble a plate of spaghetti.

The control constructs seen so far, except the goto, are all structured and are
the ones left in the modern programming languages. From a theoretical position,
they allow programs for all computable functions to be written, as we have already

150

6 Control Structure

observed. From the pragmatic point of view they are sufﬁcient to express all types
of control ﬂow present in real applications. In particular, the constructs that were
discussed at the end of Sect. 6.3.1 enable us to handle those cases in which we have
to exit from a loop, a procedure, or, in some way, interrupt processing before “normal”
termination occurs. All of these cases could be handled in a natural manner using a
goto. For example, if we wished to process all the elements of a ﬁle that we have
read from an external device, we could use code of the form17:

while true do {
read ( X );
if X = e n d _ o f _ f i l e then goto end ;
e l a b o r a t e ( X );

}
end : ...

It can be observed that this use of goto does not violate the single entry, single
exit principle because the jump only anticipates the exit, which happens at a single
point in the overall construct. The structured command break (or its analogues) is
the canonical form of this “jump to end of loop”. When written in place of goto
end, it makes the program clearer, and omits the label (the destination of the jump
implicit in the break is the unique exit from the construct).

Let us ﬁnally recall that structured programming constituted a ﬁrst reply to the
demands of so-called programming in the large,18 given that it requires the decom-
position of a system of vast dimensions into different components, each of which is
assigned a certain level of independence. The amount of independence depends on
the abstraction mechanisms being used. For example, if procedures are used, com-
munication between the various components can happen only through parameters.
More signiﬁcant answers to the needs of programming in the large cannot, though,
be given solely at the linguistic level of programming languages. Software engineer-
ing has studied many methodologies for managing projects and implementing big
software systems. Some of these methodologies also have linguistic implications,
which, however, cannot be completely accounted for in this book. The object-oriented
paradigm, together with some speciﬁcation formalisms for object-oriented projects
(like UML), are some of the replies to issues we consider in this text.

17 Wishing to avoid goto and using only while and if, we ﬁnd that we have to write code that
is much less natural.
18 This term denotes the implementation of large-scale software systems.

6.5 Recursion

Inductive Deﬁnitions

151

Using an axiomatic presentation due to Giuseppe Peano, the natural numbers (non-negative integers)
0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , can be deﬁned as the least set X , satisfying the following rules:

1. 0 ∈ X
2. If n ∈ X , then n + 1 ∈ X ,

where we assume as primitive the concept of 0 (zero), that of number (denoted by n) and that of
successor of n (written n+1). This deﬁnition of the naturals clearly provides an intuitive justiﬁcation
of the principle of induction, a fundamental tool in mathematics and also, in some ways, in computer
science. This principle can be stated as follows. To prove that a property, P(n), is true for all natural
numbers, it is sufﬁcient to show that the following two conditions are satisﬁed:

1. P(0) is true;
2. For every natural, n, if P(n) is true, then so is P(n + 1).

In addition to the proof of properties, induction is a powerful tool for the deﬁnition of functions.
In fact, it can be shown that if g : (N × X ) → X is a total function, N denotes natural numbers and
a is an element of X , then there exists a unique (total) function f : N → X , such that:

1.
2.

f (0) = a
f (a + 1) = g(n, f (n))

Such a pair of equations then provide an inductive deﬁnition of the function f .

What has so far been said about induction over the naturals can be generalised to arbitrary sets
over which a well-founded ordering relation < is deﬁned, i.e. a relation which does not admit
inﬁnite descending chains · · · xm < · · · < x1 < x0. In this case, the induction principle, called
well-founded induction, can be expressed as follows. Let < be a well-founded relation deﬁned on a
set A. To show that P(a) has a value for every a belonging to A, it is sufﬁcient to show the following
implication:

For all a ∈ A,

if P(b) is true for every b < a,

then P(a) is true.

6.5 Recursion

Recursion is another mechanism, alternative to iteration, for obtaining Turing-
equivalent programming languages. In empirical terms, a subprogram is recursive if
its body contains a call to itself. One can have indirect recursion as well (it is best
called mutual recursion) when a procedure P calls another procedure, Q, which,
in its turn, calls P. In Chap. 5, we have already seen the example of the recursive
function fib which compute the nth value of the Fibonacci function.

152

6 Control Structure

int fib ( int n ){
if ( n == 0)

r e t u r n 1;

else

if ( n == 1)

r e t u r n 1;

else

r e t u r n fib (n -1) + fib (n -2);

}

The fact that a function like fib is deﬁned in terms of itself could raise some
doubts about the mathematical nature of the function being deﬁned. In reality, recur-
sive deﬁnitions are fairly common in mathematics, where are also called inductive
deﬁnitions. As the box on “inductive deﬁnitions” shows in more detail, the idea is
that of describing the result of the application of a function f to an argument X in
terms of the application of f itself to arguments which are “smaller” than X . The
domain on which f is deﬁned must be such that it does not allow inﬁnite chains
of successively smaller elements, thus ensuring that, after a ﬁnite number of appli-
cations of the function f , we arrive at a terminal case—directly deﬁned. At this
point, we can reconstruct the value of f applied to X . For example, recalling that
the factorial of a natural number, n, is given by the product 1 · 2 · · · n − 1 · n, we can
inductively deﬁne the function computing the factorial as follows:

factorial(0) = 1,
factorial(n + 1) = (n + 1) · factorial(n).

Here n is an arbitrary natural number. In an analogous fashion, we can deﬁne the
function which computes the nth term in the Fibonacci series, for which we have
ﬁrst provided a recursive program.

If, then, inductive deﬁnitions in mathematics and recursive functions in program-
ming languages are similar, there is still a fundamental difference. In the case of
inductive deﬁnitions, not all possible deﬁnitions of function in terms of itself will
work. If we write:

foo(0) = 1,
foo(n) = foo(n) + 1 for n > 0

there is no total function over the naturals that satisﬁes these equalities. Hence they
do not deﬁne a function, contrary to the equalities for the factorial function. If, on
the other hand, we write:

ﬁe(1) = ﬁe(1)

the problem is now the opposite. Many functions satisfy these equalities, so once
again this does not constitute a valid deﬁnition.

On the other hand it is perfectly legitimate to write the following function in a

programming language supporting recursion:

153

6.5 Recursion

int foo1 ( int n ){
if ( n == 0)

r e t u r n 1;

else

r e t u r n foo1 ( n ) + 1;

}

And also:

int fie1 ( int n ){

if ( n == 1) r e t u r n fie1 (1);

}

These are functions which, in some case, do not terminate (when n > 0 for
foo1(n) and for n = 1 in the case of fie1(n)), but from the semantic viewpoint
there is no problem because, as we saw in Chap. 3, programs deﬁne partial functions.

6.5.1 Tail Recursion

In Chap. 5, we saw how the presence of recursion in a programming language makes
it necessary to include dynamic memory management since it is not possible to
statically determine the maximum number of instances of a single function that
will be active at the same time (and, therefore, to determine the maximum number
of activation records required). For example, we have seen that for the call of our
Fibonacci function fib(n), we need as many activation records as the nth Fibonacci
number, a value that cannot be known as compilation time. However, in some cases
we can avoid the allocation of new activation records for successive calls of the same
function, since we can reuse the same memory space. To understand this point, let
us look at two recursive functions for the factorial. The ﬁrst is the usual one:

int fact ( int n ){
if ( n <= 1)
else

r e t u r n 1;

r e t u r n n * fact (n -1);

}

The activation record for a call fact(n) is shown in a slightly simpliﬁed form
in Fig. 6.6. The ﬁeld n contains the value of the actual parameter to the procedure;
the ﬁeld Intermediate Result will contain the intermediate result produced by the
evaluation of fact(n-1); the ﬁeld Result address, ﬁnally, contains the address of
the memory area in which the result must be returned (that is, the address of the
ﬁeld Intermediate Result in the activation record of the caller, for all calls but the
ﬁrst). It is important to note that the value of the Intermediate Result ﬁeld present
in the activation record of fact(n), can be determined only when the reclusive
call to fact(n-1) terminates. The value of this ﬁeld is used in the computation
of n * fact(n-1), to obtain the value of fact(n). In other words, when we
are inside the call fact(n), before it can terminate, we must know the value
of fact(n-1); in its turn, for the call to fact(n-1) to terminate we have to

6 Control Structure

154

Fig. 6.6 Activation record
for the fact function

Fig. 6.7 Activation record
stack and for the call
fib(3) and the two
recursive calls fact(2)
and fact(3)

know the value of fact(n-2) and so on, recursively, right back to the terminal
case fact(1). Therefore all activation records for the recursive calls fact(n),
fact(n-1), . . . ,fact(1), must be at the same time on the stack, in distinct
memory areas.

Figure 6.7 shows the stack of activation records created by the call to fact(3),
as well as the by the following calls to fact(2) and fact(1). When we reach
the ﬁnal case, the call to fact(1), terminates immediately and returns the value 1,
which, using the pointer contained in the Result Address of the activation record for
fact(1), will be returned to the Intermediate result ﬁeld of the activation record
for fact(2), as is shown in Fig. 6.8. At this point, too, the call to fact(2) can
terminate, returning the value 2 · fact(1) = 2 · 1 to the call fact(3), as shown in
Fig. 6.9. Finally, too, the call to fact(3) will terminate, returning to the calling
program the value 3 · fact(2) = 3 · 2 = 6.

Consider now another function:

int f a c t r c ( int n , int res ){

if ( n <= 1)

r e t u r n res ;

else

r e t u r n f a c t r c ( n -1 , n * res )

}

This, if called with factrc(n,1) also returns the factorial of n.

155

6.5 Recursion

Fig. 6.8 Stack of activation
records after termination of
the call fact(2)

Fig. 6.9 Activation record
stack after the termination of
the call fact(2)

In this case, also, the initial call factrc(n,1) produces n − 1 recursive calls
factrc(n-1,n*1),
factrc(n-2,(n-1)*n*1),
…,
factrc(1,2*…*(n-1)*n*1).
However, let us now observe that for n > 1, the value returned by the generic
call factrc(n,res) is exactly the same as the value returned by the recursive
call factrc(n-1,n+res) without there being any additional computation. The
value ﬁnally returned from the initial call factrc(n,1) is therefore the same as
that returned by the last recursive call factrc(1,2*...*(n-1)*n*1) (and is
therefore n · (n − 1) · (n − 2) · · · 1), without there being any requirement to “climb
back up” the call chain using the intermediate results to compute the ﬁnal value, as
it happens, instead, in the case of fact.

From what has been said, it appears clear that, once factrc(n,res) has
recursively called factrc(n-1,n*res), there is no need to maintain the infor-
mation in the activation record for the call factrc(n,res), given that all the
information necessary to perform the calculation of the ﬁnal result is passed to
factrc(n-1,n*res). This means that the activation record for the recursive
call factrc(n-1,n*res) can simply reuse the memory space allocated to the
activation record for factrc(n,res). Same considerations can be made for all
the successive calls. In short, the function factrc needs a single memory area, to
allocate a single activation record, independent of the number of recursive calls to
be made. We have therefore obtained a recursive function for which memory can be
allocated statically!

Recursion of the kind used in the function factrc is said to be tail recursion,
since the recursive call is, so to speak, the last thing that happens in the body of the
procedure. After the recursive call, no other computation is performed. We can give
the following deﬁnition.

156

6 Control Structure

Deﬁnition 6.3 (Tail recursion) Let
f be a function deﬁnition which, in its body,
contains a call to a function g (different from f or equal to f ). The call of g is said
to be a tail call if the function f returns the value returned by g without having
is tail
to perform any other computation. We say that a function deﬁnition for f
recursive if all the recursive calls present in f are tail calls.

For example, in the function:

int f ( int n ){
if ( n == 0)

r e t u r n 1;

else

if ( n == 1)

r e t u r n f (0);

else

if ( n ==

2)

r e t u r n f (n -1);

else

r e t u r n f ( 1 ) * 2 ;

}

The ﬁrst two recursive calls are tail calls, the third is not a tail call. Therefore the
function f is not tail recursive.

Our interest in tail recursion lies in the possibility of implementing it using a single
activation record and therefore using constant memory space. Our investigation of
the factrc function, in fact, is completely general, and does not depend on the
speciﬁc form of this function; it depends only on the fact that we are dealing with a
tail recursive function. All of this, however, does not hold in the case in which we
also consider higher-order functions (i.e. when there are functions that are passed as
parameters), as we will see later in this section.

In general, it is always possible to transform a function deﬁnition which is not tail
recursive into an equivalent tail recursive one, by complicating the deﬁnition. The
idea is that all the computations which have to be made after the recursive call (and
make the function non-tail recursive) should, as far as possible, be performed before
the call. The part of the work which cannot be done before the recursive call (because,
for example, it uses its results) is “passed” with appropriate additional parameters,
to the recursive call itself. This technique is the same as the one we used in the case
of the tail-recursive function factrc, where, instead of recursively calculating the
product n*fact(n-1) in the body of the call to fact(n-1), we have added a
parameter res which allows us to pass to the product n · (n − 1) · (n − 2) · · · j to
the generic recursive call factrc(j- 1,j* res). Therefore, in this case, the
calculation of the factorial is performed incrementally by the successive recursive
calls, in a way analogous to that performed by an iterative function such as the
following:

6.5 Recursion

157

int fact - it ( int n , int res ){

res =1;
for ( i = n ; i >=1; i - -)

res = res * i ;

}

In an analogous fashion to this, we can also transform the fib function into a

function with tail recursion fibrc, by addition of two additional parameters:

int f i b r c ( int n , int res1 , int res2 ){

if ( n == 0)

r e t u r n res2 ;

else

if ( n == 1)

r e t u r n res2 ;

else

r e t u r n f i b r c ( n -1 , res2 , res1 + res2 );

}

The call fibrc(n,1,1) returns the nth value in the Fibonacci series. Clearly, both
in the case of fibrc and in that of factrc, if we want to make the additional
parameters invisible, we can encapsulate the functions inside others which have only
the parameter n. For example, in the scope of the declaration of fibrc, we can
deﬁne:

int f i b r c t r u e ( int n ){

r e t u r n f i b r c ( n ,1 ,1);

}

The transformation of one function into an equivalent one with tail recursion can
be done automatically using a technique called continuation passing style, which
basically consists of representing, at all points in a program, that part of the program
that remain using a function called a continuation. If we want to convert a function
into a tail-recursive one, it sufﬁces to use a continuation to represent everything that
remains of the computation, and pass this continuation to the recursive call. This
technique, however, does not always produce functions that can be executed with
constant memory requirements. The continuation, being a function, could contain
the variable that should be evaluated in the environment of the caller, thus requiring
the presence of the caller’s activation record.

6.5.2 Recursion or Iteration?

Without going into detail on theoretical results, let us recall that recursion and itera-
tion (in its most general form) are alternative methods for achieving the same expres-
sive power. The use of the one or the other is often due to the nature of the problem.
For the elaboration of data using rigid structures (matrices, tables, etc.), as normally
happens in numerical or data processing applications, it is often easier to use iterative
constructs. When, on the other hand, we need to process symbolic structures which

158

6 Control Structure

naturally lend themselves to a recursive deﬁnition (for example, lists, trees, etc.), it
is often more natural to use recursion.

Recursion is sometimes considered much less efﬁcient than iteration and there-
fore declarative languages are thought much less efﬁcient than imperative ones. The
argument presented above about tail recursion shows that recursion is not necessar-
ily less efﬁcient than iteration, both in terms of memory occupation and in terms
of execution time. Certainly, naive implementations of recursive functions, such as
those often resulting from the direct translation of inductive deﬁnitions, can be fairly
inefﬁcient. This is the case, for example, for our procedure fib(n) which has exe-
cution time and memory occupation that are exponential in n. However, as was seen,
using recursive functions that are more “astute”, such as those with tail recursion,
we can obtain performance similar to that of the corresponding iterative program.
The function fibrc in fact uses constant space and runs in time linear in n.

6.6 Summary

In this chapter, we have analysed the components of high-level languages relating to
the control of execution ﬂow in programs. We ﬁrst considered expressions and we
have analysed:

• The types of syntax most used for their description (as trees, or in preﬁx, inﬁx and

postﬁx linear form) and the related evaluation rules.

• Precedence and associativity rules required for inﬁx notation.
• The problems generally related to the order of evaluation of the subexpressions of
an expression. For the semantics of expressions to be precisely deﬁned, this order
must be precisely deﬁned.

• Technical details on the evaluation (short-circuit, or lazy evaluation) used by some
languages and how they can be considered when deﬁning the correct value of an
expression.

We then passed to commands, seeing:

• Assignment. This is the basic command in imperative languages. Even though it
is fairly simple, we had to clarify the notion of variable in order to understand its
semantics.

• Various commands which allow the management of control (conditionals and

iteration) in a structured fashion.

• The principles of structured programming, stopping to consider age-old questions

about the goto command.

The last section, ﬁnally, dealt with recursion, a method that stands as an alternative
to iteration for expressing algorithms. We concentrated on tail recursion, a form of
recursion that is particularly efﬁcient both in space and time. This must clear up the

6.8 Exercises

159

claim that recursion is a programming method that is necessarily less efﬁcient than
iteration.

In the various boxes, we examined a historic theme that has been important in
the development of modern programming languages, as well as a semantic issue that
precisely clariﬁes the difference that exists between imperative, functional and logic
programs.

We still have to deal with important matters concerning control abstraction (pro-
cedures, parameters and exceptions) but this will be the subject of the next chapter.

6.7 Bibliographical Notes

Many texts provide an overview of the various constructs present in programming
languages. Among these, the most complete are [2,4].

Two historical papers on the goto question are [5] (in which Böhm and
Jacopinin’s theorem is proved) and Dijkstra’s [6] (where the “dangerousness” of
the jump command is discussed).

An interesting paper, even though not for immediate reading, which delves into
themes relating to inductive deﬁnitions is [7]. For a gentler introduction to recursion
and induction, see [8].

According to Abelson and Sussman [9], the term “syntactic sugar” is due to Peter
Landin, a pioneer in Computer Science who made fundamental contributions in the
area of programming language design.

6.8 Exercises

1. Deﬁne, in any programming language, a function, f , such that the evaluation of
the expression (a + f (b)) ∗ (c + f (b)) when performed from left-to-right has a
result that differs from that obtained by evaluating right-to-left.

2. Show how the if then else construct can be used to simulate short-circuit
evaluation of boolean expressions in a language which evaluates all operands
before applying boolean operators.
3. Consider the following case command:

case Exp of

C1 ;
1:
2 ,3:
C2 ;
4 . . 6 : C3 ;
7:
C4
else : C5

Provide an efﬁcient pseudocode assembly program that corresponds to the trans-
lation of this command.

160

6 Control Structure

4. Deﬁne the operational semantics of the command

for I = s t a r t to end by step do body

using the techniques introduced in Chap. 3. Suggestion: using values of the expres-
sions, start, end and step, the following can be computed before executing
the for: the number, ic, of repetitions which must be performed (it is assumed,
as already stated in the chapter, that the possible modiﬁcation of I, start, end
and step in the body of the for have no effect upon their evaluation). Once
this value, n, has been computed, the for can be replaced by a sequence of ic
commands.

5. Consider the following function:

int n i n e t y o n e ( int x ){

if (x >100)

r e t u r n x -10;

else

r e t u r n n i n e t y o n e ( n i n e t y o n e ( x + 1 1 ) ) ;

}

Is this tail recursive? Justify your answer.

6. The following code fragment is written in a pseudo-language which admits
bounded iteration (numerically controlled) expressed using the for construct.

z =1;
for i =1 to 5+ z by 1 do {

w r i t e ( i );
z ++;

}
w r i t e ( z );

What is printed by write?

7. Say what the following code block prints. This code is written in a language
with static scope and call by name. The deﬁnition of the language contains the
following phrase: “The evaluation of the expression E1 ◦ E2 where ◦ is any
operator, consists of (i) the evaluation of E1; (ii) then the evaluation of E2; (iii)
ﬁnally, the application of the operator ◦ to the two values previously obtained.”

{ int x =5;

int P ( name int m ){
int x =2;
r e t u r n m + x ;

}
w r i t e ( P ( x ++) + x );

}

References

References

161

1. B. Liskov, J. Guttag, Abstraction and Speciﬁcation in Program Development. MIT Electrical

Engineering and Computer Science Series (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1986)

2. M.L. Scott, Programming Language Pragmatics (Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Burlington,

MA, 2000)

3. H. Rogers, Theory of Recursive Functions and Effective Computability (McGraw Hill, New

York, 1967). Reprinted by MIT Press

4. T.W. Pratt, M.V. Zelkowitz. Programming Languages: Design and Implementation, 4th edn.

(Pearson, London, 2000)

5. C. Böhm, G. Jacopini, Flow diagrams, turing machines and languages with only two formation

rules. Commun. ACM 9(5), 366–371 (1966)

6. E.W. Dijkstra, Go to statement considered harmful. Commun. ACM 11(3), 147–148 (1968)
7. P. Aczel, An introduction to inductive deﬁnitions, in Handbook of Mathematical Logic. ed. by

J. Barwise (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1977), pp.739–782

8. G. Winskel, The Formal Semantics of Programming Languages (MIT Press, 1993)
9. H. Abelson, G.J. Sussman, Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs (MIT Press,

Cambridge, MA, 1996)

Control Abstraction

7

The concept of abstraction is a recurrent theme in this text. Right from the ﬁrst
chapter, we have encountered abstract machines and their hierarchies. For them, we
used the terms “abstract” as opposed to “physical”, denoting by abstract machine,
a set of algorithms and data structures not directly present in any speciﬁc physical
machine, but executable on it by means of interpretation. Moreover, the fact that
the concept of abstract machine, to some extent, hides the underlying machine is
fundamental.

“To abstract” means to hide something. Often, abstracting from some concrete
data relating to some object, one succeeds in bringing out with more clarity a con-
cept common to that object. Each description of a phenomenon (natural, artiﬁcial,
physical, etc.) is not based on the set of all data relating to the phenomenon itself,
otherwise it would be like a 1:1 geographical map, extremely precise but useless.
Every scientiﬁc discipline describes a certain phenomenon, concentrating only on
some aspects, those which have been found to be the most relevant to the agreed
aims. It is for this reason that scientiﬁc language uses appropriate mechanisms to
express these “abstractions”. Programming languages, themselves the abstractions
of the physical machine, are no exception. Rather, expressiveness depends in an
essential way on the mechanisms of abstraction which the languages provide. These
mechanisms are the principal instruments available to the designer and programmer
for describing in an accurate, but also simple and suggestive, way the complexity of
the problems to be solved.

In a programming language, in general, two classes of abstraction mechanisms
are distinguished. Those that provide control abstraction and those that provide data
abstraction. The former provide the programmer the ability to hide procedural data;
the latter allow the deﬁnition and use of sophisticated data types without referring
to how such types will be implemented. In this chapter we will be concerned with
the mechanisms for control abstraction, while data abstraction will be the subject of
Chap. 9, after we have seen mechanisms for data structuring in the next chapter.

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
M. Gabbrielli and S. Martini, Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms,
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34144-1_7

163

164

7 Control Abstraction

Fig. 7.1 Deﬁnition and use
of a function

7.1 Subprograms

Every program of any complexity is composed of many components, each of which
serves to provide part of a global solution. The decomposition of a problem into
subproblems allows better management of complexity. A more restrictive problem
is easier to solve. The solution to the global problem is obtained by appropriate
composition of the solutions to these subproblems.

In order for all of this to be efﬁcient, however, it is necessary that the programming
language provides linguistic support which facilitates and makes possible such subdi-
visions and, therefore, re-composition. This linguistic support allows the expression
of decomposition and re-composition directly in the language, transforming these
concepts from simple methodological suggestions into real instruments for design
and programming.

The key concept provided by all modern languages is that of the subprogram,
procedure, or function.1 A function is a piece of code identiﬁed by name, is given
a local environment of its own, and is able to exchange information with the rest
of the code using parameters. This concept translates into two different linguistic
mechanisms—the deﬁnition (or declaration) of function, and its use (or call). In
Fig. 7.1, the ﬁrst ﬁve lines are the deﬁnition of the function named foo, whose local
environment is composed from three names n, a and tmp.2 The ﬁrst line is the
header, while the remaining lines constitute the body of the function. The last two
lines of Fig. 7.1 are the uses (or calls) of foo.

A function exchanges information with the rest of the program using three prin-

cipal mechanisms: parameters, return value, nonlocal environment.

1 These three terms assume different meanings in different languages. For example, “subprogram” is
usually the most general term. In languages of the Algol family and their descendants, a procedure
is a subprogram which modiﬁes the state, while a function is a subprogram that returns a value. In
this chapter we will use the three terms as synonyms.
2 The name foo is part of the nonlocal environment of the function.

7.1 Subprograms

Fig. 7.2 Renaming of
formal parameters

Parameters

165

We distinguish between formal parameters, which appear in the deﬁnition of a func-
tion, and actual parameters, which appear, instead, in the call. The formal parameters
are always names which, as far as the environment is concerned, behave as declara-
tions local to the function itself. They behave, in particular, as bound variables, in the
sense that their consistent renaming has no effect on the semantics of the function.
For example, the function foo in Fig. 7.1 and that in Fig. 7.2 are indistinguishable,
even though the second has different names for its formal parameters.

The number and type of actual and formal parameters must, in general, coincide,
although many type compatibility rules can be brought into play (see Sect. 8.7). There
is sometimes also the possibility of declaring functions with a variable number of
parameters.

Return Value

Some functions exchange information with the rest of the program by returning a
value as a result of the function itself, as well as through the use of parameters.
Our function, foo, for example, returns an integer. The language makes available,
in this case, the mechanism which allows the “return of value” to be expressed (for
example the return construct which has also the effect of terminating the execution
of the current function). In some languages, the name “function” is reserved for
subprograms which return a value, while those subprograms which interact with the
caller just via parameters or the non-local environment are called “procedures”.

In languages which derive their syntax from C, all subprograms are, linguistically,
functions. If the result type of a function is void, the function returns no meaningful
value (the command to return such a value and to terminate execution is return).

Nonlocal Environment

This is a less sophisticated mechanism with which a function can exchange infor-
mation with the rest of the program. If the body of the function modiﬁes a nonlocal
variable, it is clear that such a modiﬁcation is felt in all parts of the program where
this variable is visible.

166

Static Variables

7 Control Abstraction

We have always assumed that the local environment of a function has the same lifetime as the
function itself. In such a case, there is no primitive mechanism that one instance of a function can
use for communicating information to another instance of the same function. The only way for this
to happen is through the use of a nonlocal variable.

In some languages, however, it is possible to arrange for a variable (which must be local to a
function) to retain its value between one call to the function and another. In C, for example, this is
achieved using the static modiﬁer (Fortran uses save, Algol own, etc.). A static variable
allows programmers to write functions with memory. The following function, for example, returns
the number of times it has been called:

int h o w _ m a n y _ t i m e s (){

s t a t i c int c o u n t ;

/* C g u a r a n t e e s t h a t s t a t i c v a r i a b l e s are

i n i t i a l i s e d to zero by the first
a c t i v a t i o n of the f u n c t i o n */

r e t u r n c o u n t ++;

}

The declaration of a static variable introduces an association with unlimited lifetime into the
environment (in the lifetime of the program, clearly). It should be clear that a static variable cannot
be memorized in the activation record created for each function call and is, instead, stored together
with the global variables.

A static variable provides greater data abstraction than a global variable, since it is not visible
from outside the function. The visibility mechanisms guarantee, therefore, that it is only modiﬁable
inside the function body.

7.1.1 Functional Abstraction

From a pragmatic viewpoint, subprograms are mechanisms which allow the software
designer to obtain functional abstraction. A software component is an entity which
provides services to its environment. The clients of such a component are not inter-
ested in how the services are delivered, only in how to use them. The possibility of
associating a function with each component allows the separation of what the client
needs to know (expressed in the header of the function: its name, its parameters, its
result type, if present) from what it does not need to know (which is in the body). We
have a true functional abstraction when the client does not depend on the body of a
function, but only on the header of it. In this case, the substitution (e.g. for efﬁciency
reasons) of the body by another with the same semantics is fully transparent to the
system software. When a system is based on functional abstraction, the three acts
of speciﬁcation, implementation and implementation and use of a function can be
performed independently of each other without knowledge of the context in which
the other actions are performed.

Functional abstraction is a methodological principle, whose functions provide
linguistic support. It is clear that this is not a deﬁnitive support. It is necessary for the
programmer to use these functions correctly, for example by limiting the interactions

7.1 Subprograms

167

between function and caller only to parameter passing, because the use of the non-
local environment to exchange information between caller and callee would destroy
functional abstraction.

7.1.2 Parameter Passing

The mode in which actual parameters are paired with formal parameters, and the
semantics which results from this, is called the parameter passing discipline. Accord-
ing to what is now traditional terminology, a speciﬁc mode is composed of the kind
of communication that it supports, together with the implementation that produces
this form of communication. The mode is ﬁxed when the function is deﬁned and can
be different for each parameter; it is ﬁxed for all calls of the function.

From a strictly semantic viewpoint, the classiﬁcation of the type of communication
permitted by a parameter is simple. From a subprogram’s viewpoint, three parameter
classes can be discerned:

• Input parameters.
• Output parameters.
• Input/output parameters.

A parameter is of input type if it allows communication which is only in the direction
from the caller to the function (the “callee”). It is of output type if it permits com-
munication only in direction from the callee to the caller. Finally, it is input/output
when it permits bidirectional communication.

Note that this is a linguistic classiﬁcation, part of the deﬁnition of the language; it
is not derived from the use to which parameters are put. An input/output parameter
remains that way even if it is used only in a unidirectional fashion (e.g., from caller
to callee).

Each of these types of communications can be obtained in different ways. The
speciﬁc implementation technique constitutes the “call mode”, which we will now
subject to analysis, describing for each mode:

• What type of communication it allows.
• What form of actual parameter is permitted.
• The semantics of the mode.
• The canonical implementation.
• Its cost.

Of the modes that we will discuss, the ﬁrst one (by value) is the most important and,
by far, the most used. Also the mode by reference is relevant. Most of the others are
variations on the theme of call by value. An exception is call by name, which we
will discuss last and will allow us to present a simple case of what it means to “pass
an environment” to a procedure.

168

7 Control Abstraction

Fig. 7.3 Passing by value

Call by Value

Call by value is a mode that corresponds to an input parameter. The local environ-
ment of the procedure is extended with an association between the formal parameter
and a new variable. The actual parameter can be an expression. When called, the
actual parameter is evaluated and its r-value obtained and associated with the formal
parameter. On termination of the procedure, the formal parameter is destroyed, as is
the local environment of the procedure itself. During the execution of the body, there
is no link between the formal and the actual parameter. There is no way of make use
of a value parameter to transfer information from the callee to the caller.

Figure 7.3 shows a simple example of passing by value. Like in C, C++, Pascal
and Java, when we do not explicitly indicate any parameter-passing mode for a
formal parameter, it is to be understood that parameter is to be passed by value. The
variable y never changes its value (it always remains 1). During the execution of
foo, x assumes the initial value 2 by the effect of passing the parameter. It is then
incremented to 3, ﬁnally it is destroyed with the entire activation record for foo.

If we assume a stack-based allocation scheme, the formal parameter corresponds
to a location in the procedure’s activation record in which the value of the actual
parameter is stored during the calling sequence of the procedure.

Let us note how this is an expensive mode when the value parameter is bound to
a large data structure. In such a case, the entire structure is copied to the formal.3
On the other hand, the cost of accessing the formal parameter is minimal, since it is
the same as the cost of accessing a local variable in the body.

Passing by value is a simple mechanism with clear semantics. It is the default
mechanism in many languages and is the only way to pass parameters in C, Java,
and Python (but see the box on “Call by object reference”, below).

Call by Reference

Call by reference (also called by variable) implements a mechanism in which the
parameter can be used for both input and output. The actual parameter must be
an expression with l-value (recall the deﬁnition of l-value on Sect. 6.2.2). At the
point of call, the l-value of the actual parameter is evaluated and the procedure’s
local environment is extended with an association between the formal parameter

3 The reader who knows C should not be misled. In a language with pointers, as we will discuss
below, often the passing of a complex structure consists of passing (by value) a pointer to the data
structure. In such a case, it is the pointer that is copied, not the data structure.

7.1 Subprograms

Call by Reference in C

169

C admits only call by value but also allows the manipulation of pointers and addresses. Making use
of this fact, it is not difﬁcult to simulate call by reference. Let us consider the problem of writing a
simple function which swaps the values of two integer variables which are passed to the function
as parameters. With only call by value, there is no way to do this. We can, though, combine call by
value with pointer manipulation, as in the following example:

void swap ( int * a , int * b ) {

int tmp = * a ; * a =* b ; * b = tmp ;
}

int v1 = ...;
int v2 = ...;
swap (& v1 , & v2 );

The formal parameters to swap (both by value) are of type pointer to integer (int *). The
values of the actual parameters are the addresses (that is, the l-value) of v1 and v2 (obtained using
the operator &). In the body of swap, the use of the * operator performs dereferencing of the
parameters. For example, we can paraphrase the meaning of *a = *b as: take the value contained
in the location whose address is contained in b and store it in the location whose address is stored
in a. Our swap therefore simulates call-by-reference.

Fig. 7.4 Passage by
reference

and the actual parameter’s l-value (therefore creating an aliasing situation). The
most common case is that in which the actual parameter is a variable. In this case,
the formal and the actual are two names for the same variable. At the end of the
procedure, the connection between the formal parameter and the actual parameter’s
l-value is destroyed, as is the environment local to the procedure. It is clear that call
by reference allows bidirectional communication: each modiﬁcation of the formal
parameter is a modiﬁcation of the actual parameter.

Figure 7.4 shows a simple example of call by reference (which we have notated
in the pseudocode with the reference modiﬁer). During the execution of foo, x
is a name for y. Incrementing x in the body is, to all effects, the incrementing of y.
After the call, the value of y is therefore 1.

It can be seen that, as shown in Fig. 7.5, the actual parameter need not necessarily
be a variable but can be an expression whose l-value is determined at call time. In a
way similar to the ﬁrst case, during the execution of foo, x is a name for v[1] and
the increment of x in the body, is an increment of v[1]. After the call, the value of
v[1] is, therefore, 2.

170

7 Control Abstraction

Fig. 7.5 Another example of
passage by reference

In the stack-based abstract machine model, each formal is associated with a loca-
tion in the procedure’s activation record. During the calling sequence, the l-value of
the actual is stored in the activation record. Access to the formal parameter occurs
via an indirection which uses this location.

This is a parameter passing mode of very low cost. At the point of call, only an
address need be stored; every reference to the formal is achieved by an indirect access
(implemented implicitly by the abstract machine) which can be implemented at very
low cost on many architectures.

Call by reference is a low-level operation. It is possible in Pascal (var modiﬁer)
and in many other languages. It has been excluded from more modern languages,
where, however, some form of bidirectional communication between caller and callee
can be obtained by exploiting the interaction between parameter passing and other
mechanisms (the most important being the model chosen for variables) or the avail-
ability of pointers in the language. Two boxes discuss simple examples in C, Python,
and Java. Without some form of bidirectional communication between caller and
callee, subprograms would not be that versatile essential programming tool they are.

Call by Constant

We have already seen how call by value is expensive for large-sized data. When,
however, the formal parameter is not modiﬁed in the body of the function, we can
imagine maintaining the semantics of passing by value, implementing it using call
by reference. This is what constitutes the read-only parameter mode.

This is a mode that establishes an input communication and in which arbitrary
expressions are permitted as actual parameters. The formal parameters passed by
this mode are subject to the static constraint that they cannot be modiﬁed in the
body, either directly (by assignment) or indirectly (via calls to functions that modify
them). From a semantic viewpoint, call by constant coincides with call by value,
while the choice of implementation is left to the abstract machine. For data of small
sizes, call by constant can be implemented as call by value. For larger structures, an
implementation using a reference, without copy, will be chosen.

Call by constant is an good way to “annotate” a given parameter to a procedure.
By reading the header, one immediately has information about the fact that this
parameter is input only. Furthermore, one can count on static semantic analysis to
verify that this annotation is really guaranteed.

7.1 Subprograms

171

Call by Object Reference, or by Assignment

When a language uses a reference-based model for variables (this is the case of Python and Java—
limited to names of a class type in Java), the call by value mode takes the name of call by object
reference, or also call by assignment. In the reference-based model, a name is a reference to a value.
When an expression is used as an actual parameter in a subprogram call, it is a reference to the
value of the expression to be passed (by value) and bound to the formal parameter. In the following
Python fragment

def f ( x ):
x = val

f ( exp )

the expression exp is evaluated when f is called, determining a value v; the formal x is bound
to v in the usual reference-based model. The body of f changes the binding of x from v to val.
Upon termination, the new binding for x (and thus val) is destroyed, in accordance to the standard
semantics of pass by value.

It is important to realize, however, that since there may exist modiﬁable values, one can modify

a value inside the body of a function, and see that modiﬁcation in the caller:

L =[1]
def f ( x ):

x [0]= val

f ( L )

After the fragment ends, L is bound to the list [val].

One can see in the examples that indeed parameter passing acts as an assignment of the value of
the actual parameter to the formal parameter, from which the name “call by assignment”. Since we
are in a reference-based model, it is the reference that is passed and copied (and not the referenced
value).

Similar examples that exploit modiﬁable values may be given using class instances, either in

Python or Java. In Java:

c l a s s A {
int v ;
}

The following method swaps the values of the ﬁeld v in two instances of A:

void swap ( A a , A b ) {

int tmp = a . v ; a . v = b . v ; b . v = tmp ;
}

What is passed (by value) to swap are two references to objects of class A.

Observe, in both cases, that we may make a function modify a value in the caller, but we cannot

give a true simulation of call by reference, as instead it is the case with C.

Call by Result

Call by result is the dual of call by value. This is a mode that implements output-only
communication. The procedure’s local environment is extended with an association
between the formal parameter and a new local variable. The actual parameter must
be an expression that evaluates to an l-value. When the procedure (normally) ter-

7 Control Abstraction

172

Fig. 7.6 Call by result

Fig. 7.7 Call by value-result

minates, before the destruction of the local environment, the current value of the
formal parameter is assigned to the location obtained as l-value of the actual param-
eter. As in call by value, the following questions about evaluation order must be
answered. If there is more than one result parameter, in which order (for example,
from left to right) should the corresponding “backward assignment” from the actual to
formal be performed? Finally, when is the actual parameter’s l-value determined? It
is reasonable to determine it both when the function is called and when it terminates.4
During the execution of the body, there is no link between the formal and actual
parameters. There is no way to make use of a result parameter to transfer information
from the caller to the callee. An example of call by result is shown in Fig. 7.6. The
implementation of call by result is analogous to call by value, with which it shares
its advantages and disadvantages. From a pragmatic viewpoint, the by-result mode
simpliﬁes the design of functions that must return (that is provide as result) more
than one value, each in a different variable.

Call by Value-Result

The combination of call by value and call by result produces the call by value-result
mode. It implements bidirectional communication using the formal parameter as a
variable local to the procedure. The actual parameter must be an expression that
can yield an l-value. At the call, the actual parameter is evaluated and the r-value
thus obtained is assigned to the formal parameter. At the end of the procedure,
immediately before the destruction of the local environment, the current value of the
formal parameter is assigned to the location corresponding to the actual parameter.
An example of call by value-result is shown in Fig. 7.7.

The canonical implementation of call by value-result is analogous to that of call
by value, even if some languages (Ada, for example) choose to implement it as call
by reference in the case of large-sized data, so that the problems of cost of call by
value can be avoided.

4 Construct an example which gives different results if the l-value of the actual is determined at call
time or when the procedure terminates.

7.1 Subprograms

Fig. 7.8 Call by value-result
is not call by reference

173

The implementation of call by value-result using a reference is, however, not
semantically correct. Consider, for a moment, the fragment in Fig. 7.8. At ﬁrst sight,
the conditional command present in the body of foo seems useless, for x and y
have just received distinct values. The reality is that x and y have different values
only in the absence of aliasing. If, on the other hand, x and y are two different names
for the same variable, it is clear that the condition x == y is always true.

If, therefore, x and y are passed by value-result (there is no aliasing), the call
foo(a,a,b) terminates without the value of b being modiﬁed. If, on the other
hand, x and y are passed by reference (where there is aliasing), foo(a,a,b)
terminates by assigning the value 1 to b.

Call by Name

Call by name was introduced in Algol 60 as a semantically cleaner way of passing
parameters than by reference. After a hiatus of several decades, it has been rein-
troduced in some modern languages (e.g., Scala), and can be obtained at no cost
in languages allowing anonymous functional parameters (lambda expressions), see
Sect. 7.2.3. It is a conceptually important mode worth the effort of studying in detail
because of its properties and its implementation.

The problem that the designers of Algol 60 set themselves was to give a pre-
cise semantics to procedure deﬁnition and call. The semantics should specify in an
elementary fashion what the effect of a call to a function with speciﬁed parame-
ters would be. The solution that they chose was to deﬁne the semantics of function
call using the so-called copy rule. We will state it in the case of a function of one
argument:

Let f be a function with a single formal parameter, x, and let a be an expression of a type
compatible with that of x. A call to f with an actual parameter a is semantically equivalent
to the execution of the body of f in which all occurrences of the formal parameter, x, have
been replaced by a.

It is a simple rule, that reduces the semantics of function call to the syntactic
operation of expanding the body of the function after a textual substitution of the
actual for the formal parameter. This notion of substitution, however, is not as sim-
ple as it seems, because it must take into account the presence of several different
variables with the same name. Consider, for example, the function in Fig. 7.9. If we

174

7 Control Abstraction

Fig. 7.9 Which environment should be used to evaluate x+1 in the body of foo?

Fig. 7.10 Side effects of call by name

blindly apply the copy rule, the call foo(x+1) results in the execution of return
x+x+1. This command, executed in the local environment of foo, returns the value
5. But it is clear that this is an incorrect application of the copy rule because it makes
the result of the function depend on what the name of the local variable is. If the
body of foo had been:

{ int z =2; r e t u r n z + y ;}

the same call would result in the execution of return z+x+1, with the result 3.
In the ﬁrst substitution that we suggested, we say that the actual parameter, x,
was captured by the local declaration. The substitution used in the copy rule must
therefore be a substitution that does not capture variables. Since it is impossible to ban
different variables with the same name, we can obtain a non-capturing substitution
by requiring that the formal parameter, even after substitution is evaluated in the
environment of the caller and not in that of the callee.

We can therefore deﬁne call by name as that parameter-passing mode whose
semantics is given by the copy rule, where the concept of substitution is always
understood without capture. Equivalently, we can say that what is substituted is not
merely the actual parameter, but the actual parameter together with its own evaluation
environment which is ﬁxed at the moment of call.

Note, moreover, that the copy rule requires that the actual parameter is evalu-
ated only when (and only if) the formal parameter is encountered during execution.5
Moreover, the actual parameter is evaluated each time the formal parameter is encoun-
tered during execution. Consider the example of Fig. 7.10, where the construct i++
has the semantics of returning the current value of the variable i and then increment-
ing the value of the variable by 1. The copy rule requires that the i++ construct is

5 We say that call by name is a by need parameter passing mode.

7.1 Subprograms

175

Fig. 7.11 Call by name is not call by value-result

evaluated twice. Once for every occurrence of the formal parameter y in fie. The
ﬁrst time, its evaluation returns the value 2 and increments the value of i by one.
The second time, it returns the value 3 and increments i again.

The example we have just discussed shows how it is an error to consider call by
name as a complicated way of describing call by value-result. The two modes are
semantically different, as Fig. 7.11 shows. Let us assume, ﬁrst, that we are to execute
fiefoo with parameters passed by value-result. On termination, we will have A[1]
with value 1 and i with value 2, while the rest of the array A has not been touched.
If, on the other hand, we execute the same procedure with the two parameters passed
by name, on termination we have A[1] with value 4, i with value 2 and, what is
more important, the element A[2] has been updated to the value 1. In this case, call
by reference exhibits the same behaviour as call by value-result.

It remains to describe how call by name can be implemented. We have already
seen that the caller must pass not only the textual expression forming its actual
parameter but also the environment in which this expression must be evaluated.
We call closure6 such a pair (expression, environment) in which the environment
includes all the free variables in the expression. We can therefore say that, in the
case of call by name, the caller passes a closure, formed from the actual parameter
(in the form of a textual expression) and the current environment. When the callee
encounters a reference to the formal parameter, it is resolved using the evaluation of
the ﬁrst component of the closure in the environment given by the second component.
Figure 7.12 describes this situation in the particular case of an abstract machine with
a stack. In this case, a closure is a pair formed from two pointers: the ﬁrst points to
the code that evaluates the expression of the formal parameter, the second is a pointer
to the block which forms the local environment in which to evaluate the expression.
When a procedure f with a formal name parameter, x, is called with actual parameter
a, the call constructs a closure whose ﬁrst component is a pointer to the code for
a and whose second component is a pointer to the caller’s activation record. It then
binds this closure (for example, using another pointer) to the formal parameter x
which resides in the called procedure’s activation record.

6 The term “closure” comes from mathematical logic. A formula is closed when it does not contain
free variables. A closure is a canonical method for transforming a piece of code containing nonlocal
(that is, “free”) variables in a completely speciﬁed code.

176

7 Control Abstraction

Fig. 7.12 Implementation of
call by name

We can ﬁnally summarise what we know on call by name. It is a mode which
supports input and output parameters. The formal parameter does not correspond
to a variable that is local to the procedure; the actual parameter can be an arbitrary
expression. It is possible that the actual and formal parameters can be aliased. The
actual parameter must evaluate to an l-value if the formal parameter appears on the
left of an assignment, The semantics of call by name was established by the copy
rule which allows the maintenance of a constant link between formal and actual
parameters during execution. The canonical implementation uses a closure. The
procedure’s local environment is extended with an association between the formal
and a closure, the latter being composed of the actual parameter and the environment
in which the call occurs. Every access to the formal parameter is performed via the
ex novo evaluation of the actual parameter in the environment stored in the closure.
Call by name is an expensive parameter-passing mode, both because of the need to
pass a complex structure and, in particular, because of the repeated evaluation of the
actual parameter in an environment that is not the current one.

7.2 Higher-Order Functions

A function is higher order when it accepts as parameters, or returns another function
as its result. Although there is no unanimous agreement in the literature, we will
say that a programming language is higher-order when it allows functions either as
parameters or as results of other functions. Languages with functions as parameters
are fairly common. On the other hand, languages that allow functions to return
functions as a result are less common. This last type of operation, however, is one of
the fundamental mechanisms of functional programming languages (which we will
deal with extensively in Chap. 11). We will, in this section, discuss linguistic and
implementation problems in these two cases. We treat each of them separately.

7.2 Higher-Order Functions

177

Jensen’s Device

Call by name allows side effects to be exploited to obtaining elegant and compact code, even though
it often results in code that is difﬁcult to understand and maintain. This is the case with the so-called
Jensen’s Device which makes use of pass by name to pass a complex expression and, at the same
time, a variable which appears in the same expression, in such a way that modiﬁcations to variable
change the value of the expression. Let us consider the following example:

int s u m m a t i o n ( name int exp ; name int i ;

int s t a r t ; int stop ) {

int acc = 0;
for ( i = start , i <= stop , i ++)

acc = acc + exp ;

r e t u r n acc ;

}
int x = ...;
...
int y = s u m m a t i o n (2* x * x - 2* x + 1 , x , 1 , 10);

The side effects of passing a parameter by name are such that, in the body of the loop in
summation, the value of exp can depend upon the value of i. A moment’s reﬂection shows that
the call on the last line is equivalent to the calculation of the sum:

y =

10(cid:2)

x=1

2x 2 − 2x + 1.

Jensen’s Device allows call by name to be used as a way to derive powerful and specialisable
“higher-order” procedures at call time (in the case of the example, by indicating the expression in
which to calculate the sum).

7.2.1 Functions as Parameters

The general case is that of a language with functional parameters, nested environ-
ments and the ability to deﬁne functions at every nesting level.7 Let us consider the
example shown in Fig. 7.13.

Using the notation void g (int h(int n)){ ... }, we mean, in our
pseudo-language, the declaration of the function g with a single formal parameter,
h, which, in its turn, is speciﬁed to be a function returning an int with its own formal
parameter of type int.8 The two key points of the example are: (i) the fact that f is
passed as an actual parameter to g and later called through the formal parameter h;
and (ii) the name x is deﬁned more than once, so it is necessary to establish which

7 C allows functions as parameters, but it is possible to deﬁne a function only in the global envi-
ronment. With this limitation, the problem becomes considerably simpliﬁed (and this simplicity is
one of the reasons why C does not allow nested functions).
8 The name of the formal parameter of h (in this case n), is of no relevance and there is no way in
which the programmer can use it in the body of g.

178

7 Control Abstraction

Fig. 7.13 Functional parameters

is the (nonlocal) environment in which f will be evaluated. Concerning this second
question, the reader will not be surprised if we observe that there are two possibilities
for selecting the nonlocal environment to use when executing a function f invoked
using a formal parameter h:

• Use the environment that is active at the time when the link between h and f is
created (which happens on line 11). We say, in this case, that the language uses a
deep binding policy.

• Use the environment that is active when the call of f using h occurs (which
happens on line 7). In this case, we say that the language uses a shallow binding
policy.9

Although the two alternatives for binding immediately recall the distinction
between static and dynamic scope, we emphasise that the binding policy (in the
case of higher-order functions) should be considered independent of scope policy.
All common languages that use static scope also use deep binding (because the choice
of a shallow policy appears contradictory at the methodological level). The matter
is not as clear for languages with dynamic scope, among which there are languages
with deep as well as shallow binding.

Returning to the example of Fig. 7.13, the different scope and binding policies

yield the following behaviours:

• Under static scope and deep binding, the call h(3) returns 4 (and g returns 6).
The x in the body of f when it is called using h is the one in the outermost block;

9 The terminology, however, is not uniform across the literature. In particular, the terms deep and
shallow binding are also used, in a special way, in the LISP community to indicate two different
implementation techniques for dynamic scope.

7.2 Higher-Order Functions

179

• Under dynamic scope and deep binding, the call h(3) returns 7 (and g returns 9).
The x in the body of f when it is called using h is the one local to the block in
which the call g(f) occurs;

• Under dynamic scope and shallow binding, the call h(3) returns 5 (and g
returns 7). The x in the body of f at the moment of its call through h is the
one local to g.

Implementation of Deep Binding

Shallow binding does not pose additional implementation problems to the technique
used to implement dynamic scope. It is enough, at least conceptually, to look for
every name’s last association in the environment. Things are different, though, for
deep binding, which requires auxiliary data structures in addition to the usual static
and dynamic chains.

So as to ﬁx our ideas, let us consider the case of a language with static scope and
deep binding (the case of dynamic scope is left to the reader, see Exercise 6). From
Sect. 5.5.1, we already know that to any direct invocation (one that is not of a call
to a formal parameter) of a function f, there is statically associated information (an
integer) which expresses the nesting level of the deﬁnition of f with respect to the
block in which the call occurs. This information is used dynamically by the abstract
machine to initialise the static chain pointer (that is, the nonlocal environment) in
the activation record for f. When, on the other hand, a function f is invoked using a
formal parameter, h, no information can be associated to the call because it is called
via a formal parameter. Indeed, in the course of different activations of the procedure
in which it is located, the formal can be associated with different functions (this is
the case, for example, with the call h(3) in Fig. 7.13).

In other words, it is clear that with deep binding, the information about the static
chain pointer must be determined at the moment the association between the formal
and actual parameters is created. With the formal h must be associated not only the
code for f but also the nonlocal environment in which the body of f is to be evaluated.
Such a nonlocal environment can be determined in a simple fashion: corresponding
to a call of the form g(f) (the procedure g is called with the functional actual
parameter f), we can statically associate with the parameter f the information about
the nesting level of the deﬁnition of f within the block in which the call g(f)
occurs. When this call is performed, the abstract machine will use this information
to associate with the formal parameter corresponding to f both the code for f, and a
pointer to the activation record of the block inside which f is declared (this pointer
is determined using the same rules that were discussed in Sect. 5.5.1).

The formal function parameter is therefore associated logically with a (text, envi-
ronment) pair, represented at the implementation level by a pair (pointer to code,
pointer to an activation record). We have already seen when we discussed the imple-
mentation of call by name that such a data structure is called a closure. Therefore, a
closure is associated with the formal functional parameter. When the formal param-
eter is used to invoke a function (that is statically unknown), the abstract machine
ﬁnds in the ﬁrst component of the pair the code to which to transfer control and

180

7 Control Abstraction

Fig. 7.14 Closure and static
chain

assigns the content of the second component of the closure to the static chain pointer
of the activation record for the new invocation.

Figure 7.14 shows the situation on the activation stack for the code in Fig. 7.13 at
the moment at which the function f is entered (it is called using h from the body
of g). When the function g is called with actual parameter f, a closure is linked to h.
f is declared at distance 1 from the place in which it appears as an actual parameter
(it is in fact declared inside the block which contains the one in which it appears as
an actual parameter). The second component of the closure is therefore determined
by 1 step along the static chain (obtaining a pointer to the outer block). When f is
called through the name h, the corresponding activation record is pushed onto the
stack. The value of the static chain pointer is taken from the second component of
the closure.

The reader will recall, once more, that the problems we are discussing appear only
when the language allows the deﬁnition of functions with nonlocal environments,
that is allows the deﬁnition of functions inside nested blocks. In the contrary case, for
example in C, there is no nonlocal environment, so there is no need for closures. To
pass a function as a parameter, it is enough to pass a pointer to its code. All nonlocal
references in the body of the function will be resolved in the global environment.

Binding Policy and Static Scope

We have already observed how all languages with static scope use deep binding. At
ﬁrst sight it could rather seem that deep or shallow binding make no difference in the
case of static scope. After all, the nonlocal environment of a function is determined
from the (static) position of its declaration and not by the way in which it is invoked.
In the case in Fig. 7.13, it is the scope (and not binding) rule that establishes that
every invocation of f (whether direct, using its name, or indirect, using a formal
parameter) is evaluated in the outermost nonlocal environment.

In general, however, it is not like this. The reason for this is that there can be
many activation records for the same function simultaneously present on the stack

7.2 Higher-Order Functions

181

Thunks

The parameter-passing rule required for functional parameters is similar to call by name. In fact, a
formal name parameter can be considered as a kind of functional parameter (without arguments).
Analogously, the corresponding actual parameter can be considered as the deﬁnition of an anony-
mous argumentless function. During execution of the body, every occurrence of the name parameter
corresponds to an ex novo evaluation of the actual parameter in the environment ﬁxed at the moment
the association between the actual and formal name parameter is made. A process that is analogous
to a new call to the anonymous function corresponding to the actual parameter.

In Algol 60 jargon, the name thunk was used for a structure like this—a function without
arguments associated to its evaluation environment. In call by name, therefore a connection between
the formal parameter and a thunk is introduced.

Fig. 7.15 The binding
policy is necessary for
determining the environment

(this clearly happens when we have recursive or mutually recursive functions). If
a procedure is passed out from one of these activations, it is possible to create a
situation in which the scope rules alone are not enough to determine which nonlocal
environment to use in invoking the functional parameter. As an example, we will
discuss the code in Fig. 7.15, which, as usual, we assume was written in a pseudo-
language with static scope.

The heart of the problem is the (nonlocal) reference to x inside fie. The scope
rules tell us that such an x refers to the formal parameter to foo (which, as it happens,
is the only x declared in the program). But when fie is called (using the formal
f), there are two active instances of foo (and therefore two instances of its local
environment). A ﬁrst activation from the call foo(g,1), in which x is associated
to the value 1, and a second one from the (recursive) call foo(fie, 0), in which
x is associated with the value 0. It is inside this second activation that the call to
fie through f is made. We can argue that the scope rules say nothing about which
of the instances of x should be used in the body of f. It is at this point that the
binding policy intervenes. Using deep binding, the environment is established when
the association between fie and f is created, that is when x is associated with the
value 1. The call to f() will therefore return 1 (which is also the value printed by
the program). To help in understanding this example, Fig. 7.16 shows the stack and
the closures when fie is executed.

In the case of shallow binding (which, let us repeat, is not used with static scope),
the environment would be determined at the time f is invoked and z would be
assigned the value 0.

182

7 Control Abstraction

The Environment in C

The structure of the environment in C is particularly simple. A C program consists, in fact, of
a sequence of variable and function declarations. The variables declared in this way (which in C
jargon are called external variables) are visible at any point in the program. They are global variables,
according to the terminology of Sect. 4.2.2. Functions are structured internally as blocks, and in
each block local variables can be declared, but the deﬁnition of functions inside other functions is
not permitted.

The environment of a function, therefore, is composed of a local and a global part. Each reference
to a nonlocal name is resolved in a unique fashion in the global environment. With this simpliﬁed
structure, environment handling is very simple. The static chain does not have to be maintained and
to pass a function as a parameter to another function, it is sufﬁcient to pass a pointer to its code.

For reasons of efﬁciency, furthermore, there is no management of in-line blocks. Variables

declared in any block in a function are allocated in the activation record of the function.

Execution efﬁciency is one of the primary objectives for C. To avoid the cost of activation record
stacks, the compiler can choose to translate a function call using the expansion of its body (in the
case of a recursive function, the expansion happens once only).

What Deﬁnes the Environment

Before closing this section, let us consider again the problem encountered in Chap. 4,
of which rules are used to determine the environment. We can ﬁnally complete the
ingredients which contribute to the correct determination of the evaluation environ-
ment for a block-structured language. The following are necessary:

• Visibility rules, normally guaranteed by block structure.
• Exceptions to the visibility rules (which take into account, for example, redeﬁni-
tions of names and the possibility or not of using a name before its declaration).

• Scope rules.
• The rules for the parameter passing method.
• The binding policy.

7.2.2 Functions as Results

The possibility of generating functions as the results of other functions allows the
dynamic creation of functions at runtime. A function returned as a result cannot be
represented at execution time by its code alone, since it is also necessary to include
the environment in which the function will be evaluated. Let us consider a ﬁrst simple
example in Fig. 7.17. Let us ﬁx, ﬁrst of all, the notation: by void->int we denote
the type of the functions which take no argument (void) and return a value of type
integer (int). The second line of the code is therefore the declaration of a function
F which returns a function of no arguments which also returns an integer (note that
return g returns the “function”, not its application). The ﬁrst line after the body

7.2 Higher-Order Functions

183

Fig. 7.16 Activation stack for Fig. 7.15

Fig. 7.17 Functions as
results

of F is the declaration of the name gg with which the result of the evaluation of F
is dynamically associated.

It should not be difﬁcult to convince ourselves that the function gg returns the
successor of the value of x. Using the static scope regime, this x is ﬁxed by the
structure of the program and not by the position of the call to gg, which could
appear in an environment in which another deﬁnition of the name x occurs.

We can, therefore, say that, in general, when a function returns a function as result,
this result is a closure. In consequence, the abstract machine must be appropriately
modiﬁed to take into the account calls to closures. Analogous to what happens when
a function is called via a formal parameter, when a function whose value is obtained
dynamically (like gg), the static chain pointer of its activation record is determined
using the associated closure (and not the canonical rules discussed in Sect. 5.5.1,
which would be of no help).

184

7 Control Abstraction

Fig. 7.18 Functions as result
and stack discipline

Fig. 7.19 Activation records
for Fig. 7.18

The general situation, moreover, is more complex. If it is possible to return a
function from the inside of a nested block, it is possible to arrange that its evaluation
environment will refer to a name that, according to stack discipline, is going to
be destroyed. Let us consider, indeed, the code in Fig. 7.18, where we have moved
the declaration of x to the inside of F. Figure 7.19 shows the activation record
arrangement when gg() is called.

When the result of F() is assigned to gg, the closure which forms its value points
to an environment containing the name x. But this environment is local to F and will
therefore be destroyed on its termination. How is it possible, then, to call gg later,
without producing a dangling reference to x? The reply can only be drastic: abandon
stack discipline for activation records, so that they can then stay alive indeﬁnitely,
because they could constitute the environments for functions that will be evaluated
subsequently. In languages with the characteristics that we have just discussed, local
environments have an unlimited lifetime.

The most common solution in this case is to allocate all activation records in the
heap and to leave it to a garbage collector to deallocate them when it is discovered
that there are no references to the names they contain.

Functional languages are constructed around the possibility of returning functions
as results—they must therefore take this problem head on. On the contrary, returning
functions as results in imperative languages is less common, for the purpose to main-
tain a stack discipline for activation records. Older imperative languages which permit
functions as results add restrictions aimed at guaranteeing that it is never possible to
create a reference to an environment that has become deactivated—for example: no

7.2 Higher-Order Functions

185

Generators in Python

In Python, a “function” deﬁnition whose body contains a yield command, deﬁnes a generator—
an object to be used for the generation of a sequence of values. The command yield exp (which,
like a return, may appear only inside a function deﬁnition) stops the evaluation of the body, and
returns the value of exp to the caller. Differently from return, however, a yield does not force
the destruction of the activation record of the function call.

def f ( x ):

w h i l e x <10:
y i e l d x
x = x +1

F = f (2)
p r i n t ( next ( F ))
p r i n t ( next ( F ))

The call f(2) does not execute the body of f (but for the binding of the formal to the actual
parameter). It returns instead a generator object, which the assignment binds to the name F. When
the predeﬁned function next is called on a generator, the body of the generator is executed until a
yield command is found. In our example, a ﬁrst next(F) will start the execution of f, stopping
at yield x: the current value of x is returned as value of next(F) and thus 2 is printed.

When yield is executed, the activation record of its generator is not destroyed. Moreover,
the program location where the yield occurred is saved, so that a subsequent next on the same
generator will resume the execution from where it was paused and with the environment and memory
in which it was paused. In the example, the second call next(F) will return 3. We can thus keep
calling next(F), obtaining all the values of the generator. After producing the last value (9, in
the example) the generator is exhausted—a further call next(F) will make the execution reach
the end of the body (that is, an implicit return) and a StopIteration exception is raised.

The name StopIteration makes explicit that generators may be used as sequences control-

ling a for iteration, see Sect. 6.3.3.

nested functions (C, C++), return only non-nested functions (Modula-2, Modula-3),
appropriately restrict the scope of those nested functions that are returned (Ada).
More modern languages, instead, allow a full functional programming style, and
therefore implements also non-stack-based activation records. The case of Python
is particularly interesting. In addition to the possibility of returning functions from
nested scopes, it also allows subprograms to return a value and be put on hold (hence
without their activation record being destroyed) so that their execution could be later
resumed. It is the case discussed in the box on generators.

7.2.3 Anonymous Functions: Lambda Expressions

In older imperative languages, subprograms have a different status than other prim-
itive values. For instance, in C we may introduce a function only through a function
deﬁnition, thus giving also a name to that function. On the other hand, we have

186

7 Control Abstraction

Fig. 7.20 Python: lambda
expressions simulate pass by
name

unnamned expressions denoting integer values.10 More modern languages, where
functions are ﬁrst-class citizens, allow also unnamed expressions denoting functions,
usually called lambda expressions (see Sect. 11.6 for the motivation for the name).
In Scala the following line

( x : D o u b l e ) = > x * x

is an expression denoting the function taking a ﬂoating-point number and returning
its square. The analogous expression in Python would be written

l a m b d a x : x * x

We may use this expression as is, e.g. by applying it to an argument:

( l a m b d a x : x * x ) ( 2 . 0 )

evaluates to 4.0. Or we may bind it to a name via an assignment

sq = l a m b d a x : x * x

which is equivalent to a standard function deﬁnition:

def sq ( x ):

r e t u r n x * x

However, one of the main uses of lambdas is as arguments to higher-order functions,
avoiding the deﬁnition of a function that otherwise would never be called on its own.
As such, lambdas are also a way to obtain the same behavior of parameter passing
by name. Figure 7.20 rephrases in Python, using lambdas, the program we gave with
pass by name in Fig. 7.9. Note how the lambda without formal parameters (lambda
: x+1) encodes a thunk (see the box on Sect. 7.1.2).

It should be clear, by now, that similarly to pass by name, the implementation of a
lambda expression is a closure, since its body may well contain names that need an
environment to make sense. As a ﬁnal incarnation of closures, let us mention Scala’s
deﬁnitions with deferred evaluation. The following deﬁnition

def foo : Int = {

p r i n t l n ( " test " )
10
}

introduces the integer name foo, bound to the code on the right of =, which is
not evaluated at deﬁnition time. Whenever foo is evaluated, the code is evaluated

10 Using the terminology of the box on Sect. 6.2.2, functions in C are denotable, but not expressible.
Integer values are both denotable and expressible (and also storable).

7.3 Exceptions

187

anew (thus obtaining the value 10 and the printing side-effect). The body of the
def can use names deﬁned in the outer environment, thus requiring a closure to be
implemented.

7.3 Exceptions

An exception is an event that is checked during the execution of a program and which
must not (or cannot) be handled in the normal ﬂow of control. Such events could
be checking that a dynamic semantic error has occurred (e.g., a division by zero,
overﬂow, etc.) or checking that a situation has occurred for which the programmer
explicitly decides to terminate the current computation and transfer control to another
point in the program, often outside the currently executing block.

First-generation languages did not provide structures for handling such situations.
They typically treat them by means of jumps (gotos). On the other hand, many
modern languages such as C++, Scala, Java, and Python have structural mechanisms
for exception handling which appear as real abstraction constructs. These constructs
allow the interruption of a computation and the shifting of control outside of the
current construct, block or procedure. Often, this mechanism also allows data to be
passed across the jump, resulting in a very ﬂexible (and also often efﬁcient) tool
for handling those cases of exceptional termination of a computation which the
normal control constructs (loops and conditionals) are unable to handle properly.
Devised for handling the unusual or exceptional cases which can present themselves
in a program, exceptions are also useful, as we will see, when giving compact and
efﬁcient deﬁnitions of some ordinary algorithms.

The mechanisms for handling exceptional situations vary greatly from language
to language. We will restrict ourselves here to describing some common approaches
and we do not pretend to be exhaustive. In general, to correctly handle exceptions, a
language must:

1. Specify which exceptions can be handled and how they can be deﬁned.
2. Specify how an exception can be raised, that is which mechanisms cause the

exceptional termination of a computation.

3. Specify how an exception can be handled, that is what are the actions to perform

when an exception occurs and where to transfer control of execution.

On the ﬁrst point, we ﬁnd both exceptions raised directly by the abstract machine
(when some dynamic semantic condition is violated) and exceptions deﬁned by the
user. The latter can be values of a special type (as is the case in Ada and in ML), or
any value whatsoever (as in C++) or something in the middle (in Java and Python,
an exception is an instance of some subclass of a class predeﬁned for this purpose—
Throwable in Java, Exception in Python). Usually, an exception can contain a
dynamically generated value which is passed to the handler.

188

7 Control Abstraction

Fig. 7.21 Exception handling

Once an exception is deﬁned, it can be raised implicitly if it is an abstract machine

exception, or explicitly by the programmer using an appropriate construct.

Finally, for point (3), the handling of an exception requires two different con-

structs:

• A mechanism that deﬁnes a capsule around a portion of code (the protected block),
with the aim of intercepting the exceptions that are to be handled inside the capsule
itself.

• The deﬁnition of a handler for the exception, statically linked to the protected block.
Control is transferred to the handler when the capsule intercepts the exception.

Let us examine the example in Fig. 7.21 (written in the usual pseudo-language
inspired by Java and C++). The ﬁrst line is the deﬁnition of the exception. In the case
we are considering, all instances of class EmptyExcp can be an exception. To an
approximation, we can imagine an instance of such a class as a record with a single
internal ﬁeld, labelled by x. Passing an exception involves the creation of a such a
value and then raising the exception proper.

The second line is the deﬁnition of the average function. The keyword throws
introduces the list of exceptions that can be thrown in the body of the function (in
our case EmptyExcp). This clause (necessary in Java but optional in C++) has an
important function as documentation: it shows the clients of the function that, in
addition to the integer result, it could result in anomalous termination as signalled
by the exception itself.

The construct that raises an exception is throw. A protected block is introduced
by the keyword try, while the handler is contained in a block introduced by catch.
The average function computes the arithmetic mean of the elements of the vector V.
In the case in which the vector is empty, the function, instead of returning something
arbitrary, raises an exception of class EmptyExcp. In checking such an event, the
language’s abstract machine interrupts the execution of the current command (in this
case, the conditional command) and propagates the exception. All blocks entered
during execution are exited until a try block trapping (catch) this exception

7.3 Exceptions

189

is found. In the case of Fig. 7.21, the average function would be terminated, as
would every block appearing between the only try present and the call to average.
When the exception is intercepted by a try, control passes to the code in the catch
block. If no explicit try trapping the exception is encountered, it is captured by a
default handler which then terminates execution of the program and prints some error
message.

The handler (the code in the catch) block is statically linked to the protected
block. When an exception is detected, execution of the handler replaces the part of
the protected block which has still to be executed. In particular, after execution of
the handler, control ﬂows normally to the ﬁrst instruction which follows the handler
itself.11

As far as these questions are strongly dependent on the language, let us make two

important observations:

1. An exception is not an anonymous event. It has a name (often, rather, as in our
case, it is a value in one of the language’s types) which is explicitly mentioned in
the throw construct and is used by constructs of the form try-catch to trap
a speciﬁc class of exception.

2. Although the example does not show it, the exception could include a value which
the construct that raised the exception passes in some way to the handler as an
argument on which to operate in order to react to the exception that has just
occurred (in our case, the value of the ﬁeld x could have been modiﬁed when the
exception is raised).

It is easy to convince ourselves that the propagation of an exception is not a
simple jump. Let us assume that the exception is raised inside some procedure. If the
exception is not handled inside the currently executing procedure, it is necessary to
terminate the current procedure and to re-raise the exception at the point at which the
current procedure was invoked. If the exception is not handled by the caller either, the
exception is propagated along the procedure’s call chain until it reaches a compatible
handler or reaches the highest level which provides a default handler (which results
in an error termination).

A subtle aspect which is worth explicitly considering is that exceptions propagate
along the dynamic chain, even if the handler is statically associated with the protected
block. To illustrate this point, let us consider the code in Fig. 7.22, where we have
assumed that we have already declared an exception class X.

The exception X is raised inside two protected blocks. The outer try is the one
in the body of g. This is the one that traps the exception. The program prints the
string “in g”. Figure 7.23 shows the stack of activation records and handlers when the

11 This way of working is, in the literature, called “handling with termination” (because the construct
where the exception is determined is terminated). Some older languages, PL/1 for example, (one
of the ﬁrst languages to introduce exception-handling mechanisms) follow a different approach,
called “handling with resumption”. In this case, the handler can arrange that control returns to the
point where the exception was raised. The scheme with resumption can lead to ﬂagging errors that
are very difﬁcult to locate.

190

7 Control Abstraction

Fig. 7.22 Exceptions propagate along the dynamic chain

Fig. 7.23 System stack for Fig. 7.22

body of function f is executed. Considering Fig. 7.22, note that, in the case in which
the argument of g in the protected block is a variable whose value is execution-
dependent, it is not statically determinable which will be the handler to invoke.

Summarising, an exception is handled by the last handler that has been placed on
the execution stack. This is a reasonable behaviour. The exception is trapped at the
closest possible point to the one at which it was detected.

Pragmatics

We have discussed the use of exceptions in handling error cases. There are ordinary
cases, though, in which the cautious use of exceptions makes for more elegant and
efﬁcient programs. We will limit ourselves to presenting one example, that of walking
a binary tree where it is desired to calculate the product of the integers which label
the nodes. The most obvious code is that shown in Fig. 7.24, where a depth-ﬁrst
search of the tree is used and it is assumed that the type Tree is a structure (a record
or a class) with three ﬁelds of which the ﬁrst is an integer and the others are of type
Tree and which link the structure together. The generic null value is represented by
null.

7.3 Exceptions

191

Easier to Ask Forgiveness Than Permission

Python provides a fast and efﬁcient exception-handling mechanism, and an abstract machine that
checks many common problems, raising the corresponding predeﬁned exceptions. These two factors
make the use of exceptions a popular programming style.

In the Python community a coding style characterized by the presence of many try and except
statements is called EAFP (easier to ask forgiveness than permission) and it is recommended over
a programming style where one checks beforehand for all possible limit cases, characterized by
many if statements (which would result in a “look before you leap” style, LBYL).

Fig. 7.24 Anticipated visit to a binary tree

The function mul correctly returns the product of the nodes, but is inefﬁcient in
the cases of very large trees where there is signiﬁcant chance that some nodes are
zero, given that in such a case the function could immediately terminate with the
result zero. We can make use of the exception mechanism to force this expected
termination.

Figure 7.25 shows the function mulAus which raises an exception (of class Zero,
which we assume to be deﬁned elsewhere) when it encounters a node labelled with
zero. mullAus is called by mulEff12 inside to the protected block which handles
the exception returning zero.

Fig. 7.25 A more efﬁcient traversal

12 The function mulEff is the function “exported” to clients in this program. In jargon, we say
that mulEff is a wrapper of mulAus.

192

7 Control Abstraction

7.3.1 Implementing Exceptions

The simplest and intuitive way in which an abstract machine can implement excep-
tions is one that uses the stack of activation records. When a block is entered at
runtime, a pointer to the corresponding handler (together with the type of exception
to which it refers) is inserted into the activation record (of the current procedure or of
the current anonymous block). When a normal exit is made from a protected block
(that is, because control transfers from it in the usual way and not through raising an
exception), the reference to the handler is removed from the stack. Finally, when an
exception is raised, the abstract machine looks for a handler for this exception in the
current activation record. If one is not found, it uses the information in the record to
reset the state of the machine, removes the record from the stack and rethrows the
exception. This is a conceptually very simple solution but it has a not insigniﬁcant
defect: each time that a protected block is entered, or is left, the abstract machine
must manipulate the stack. This implementation, therefore, requires explicit work
even in the normal (and more frequent) case in which the exception is not raised.

A more efﬁcient runtime solution is obtained by anticipating a little of the work at
compile time. In the ﬁrst place, each procedure is associated with a hidden protected
block formed from the entire procedure body and whose hidden handler is responsible
only for clearing up the state and for rethrowing the exception unchanged. The
compiler then prepares a table, EH, in which, for each protected block (including
the hidden ones) it inserts two addresses (ip, ig) which correspond to the start of
the protected block and the start of its handler. Let us assume that the start of the
handler coincides with the end of the protected block. The table, ordered by the ﬁrst
component of the address, is passed to the abstract machine. When a protected block
is entered or exited normally, nothing need be done. When, on the other hand, an
exception is raised, a search is performed in the table for a pair of addresses (ip, ig)
such that ip is the greatest address present in EH for which ip ≤ pc ≤ ig, where
pc is the value of the program counter when the exception is detected. Since EH
is ordered, a binary search can be performed. The search locates a handler for the
exception (recall that a hidden handler is added to each procedure). If this handler
re-throws the exception (because it does not capture this exception or because it is
a hidden handler), the procedure starts again, with the current value of the program
counter (if it was a handler for another exception) or with the return address of the
procedure (if it was a hidden handler). This solution is more expensive than the
preceding one when an exception is detected, at least by a logarithmic factor in
the number of handlers (and procedures) present in the program (the reduction in
performance depends on the need to perform a search through a table every time; the
cost is logarithmic because a binary search is performed). On the other hand, it costs
nothing at protected block entry and exit, where the preceding solution imposed a
constant overhead on both of these operations. Since it is reasonable to assume that
the detection of an exception is a rarer event than simple entry to a protected block,
we have a solution that is on average more efﬁcient than the preceding one.

7.4 Summary

193

Exceptions and Static Scope

In languages with static scope, the combination of the dynamic association of handlers with protected
blocks and the static scope for exception name deﬁnitions, may create subtle interactions.

Let us discuss the Java code in Fig. 7.26. On a superﬁcial reading, the code seems syntactically
correct and we may presume that an invocation of g on an instance of Q results in the string “in g”
being printed. Yet, if compilation is attempted, the compiler ﬁnds two static semantic errors around
line 12: (i) the exception X which must be caught by the corresponding catch is not raised in the
try; (ii) the exception X, raised by f, is not declared in the (absent) throws clause of g.

Exception names (X in this case) have normal static scope. Method f raises the exception X
declared on line 1; while the catch on line 12 traps the exception X declared on line 9 (and which
is more correctly denoted by Q.X, since it is a nested class within Q). Just so as to avoid errors
caused by situations of this kind, Java imposes the requirement on every method that it must declare
all the exceptions that can be generated in its body in its throws clause.

The analogous situation can be reproduced in C++, mutatis mutandis. In C++, however, the
throws clause is optional. If we compile the C++ code corresponding to that in Fig. 7.26, in which
throws clauses are omitted, compilation terminates properly. But an invocation to the method f
throws an exception different from that caught in the body of g. An invocation of g on an instance
of Q results in an exception X (of the class declared on line 1) which is then propagated upwards.
In Python, on the other hand, the program situation of Fig. 7.26 would print the string “in g”.
But not because exception names do not follow a static scope discipline. The fact is that the scope
of any name local to a class deﬁnition does not include the blocks nested into the class. Hence, the
exception name X deﬁned inside Q is not visible inside g, where, however, is visible the X deﬁned
at top level. To reproduce the C++ behavior we may move the deﬁnition of X from the ﬁrst line of
Q to the ﬁrst line of the deﬁnition of g. Now a call to g on an instance of Q results in an uncaught
exception.

That class scopes do not include nested blocks (thus introducing an important exception to the
general visibility rule for block-structured languages we introduced in Sect. 4.2.2) is a controversial
Python feature.

7.4 Summary

The chapter has dealt with a central question for every programming language:
mechanisms for functional abstraction. It has discussed, in particular, two of the most
important linguistic mechanisms to support functional abstraction in a high-level
language: procedures and constructs for handling exceptions. The main concepts
introduced are:

• Procedures: The concept of procedure, or function, or subprogram, constitutes the
fundamental unit of program modularisation. Communication between procedures
is effected using return values, parameters and the nonlocal environment.

• Parameter passing mode: From a semantic viewpoint, there are input, output and
input-output parameters. From an implementation viewpoint, there are different
ways to pass a parameter:

– By value.
– By reference.

194

7 Control Abstraction

Fig. 7.26 Static scope and exception names

– By means of one of the variations on call by value: by result, by constant or by

value-result.

• Higher-order functions: Functions that take functions as arguments or return them
as results. The latter case, in particular, has a signiﬁcant impact on the imple-
mentation of a language, forcing the stack discipline for activation records to be
abandoned.

• Binding policy: When functions are passed as arguments, the binding policy spec-
iﬁes the time at which the evaluation environment is determined. This can be when
the link between the procedure and the parameter is established (deep binding) or
when the procedure is used via the parameter (shallow binding).

• Closures: Data structures composed of a piece of code and an evaluation environ-
ment, called closures, are a canonical model for implementing call by name and
all those situations in which a function must be passed as a parameter or returned
as a result.

• Exceptions: Exceptional conditions which can be detected and handled in high-
level languages using protected blocks and a handler. When an exception is
detected, the appropriate handler is found by ascending the dynamic chain.

7.5 Bibliographical Notes

The principal modes for parameter passing originate in the work of the Algol
committee and were subsequently explored in other languages such as Algol W
and Pascal. The original deﬁnition of Algol 60 [1] is a milestone in programming
language design. The preparatory work on Algol W can be seen in [2] and in
its mature form in the reference manual [3]. Algol W included call by name (as

7.6 Exercises

195

default), call by value, by result and by value-result, as well as pointers and garbage
collection. Pascal, which adopts as default call by reference, was ﬁrst deﬁned in
[4]; the reference manual for the ISO Standard is [5]. Call by object reference (“by
assignment”) was introduced in CLU [6] (and originally called “call by sharing” [7]).
The problems with determining the environment in the case of higher-order func-
tions are often known as the funarg problem (the functional argument problem). The
downward funarg problem refers to the case of functions passed as arguments and
therefore to the necessity of handling deep binding. The upward funarg problem
refers to the case in which a function can be returned as a result [8]. The relations
between binding policy and scope rules are discussed in [9].

One of the ﬁrst languages with exceptions was PL/1 which used resumption han-
dling (see [10]). More modern handling with termination (where the text of the
program speciﬁes which handler is responsible for any protected block) descends
from Ada, which, in its turn, was inspired by [11].

7.6 Exercises

1. On Sect. 7.1, commenting on Fig. 7.1, it can be seen that the environment of the
function foo includes (as a nonlocal) the name foo. What purpose does the
presence of this name serve inside the block?

2. State what will be printed by the following code fragment written in a pseudo-
language permitting reference parameters (assume Y and J are passed by refer-
ence).

int X [ 1 0 ] ;
int i = 1;
X [0] = 0;
X [1] = 0;
X [2] = 0;
void foo ( r e f e r e n c e int Y , J ){

X [ J ] = J +1;
w r i t e ( Y );
J ++;
X [ J ]= J ;
w r i t e ( Y );

}
foo ( X [ i ] , i );
w r i t e ( X [ i ]);

3. State what will be printed by the following code fragment written in a pseudo-

language which allows value-result parameters:

int X = 2;
void foo ( v a l u e r e s u l t int Y ){

Y ++;
w r i t e ( X );
Y ++;

196

7 Control Abstraction

}
foo ( X );
w r i t e ( X );

4. The following code fragment, is to be handed to an interpreter for a pseudo-

language which permits constant parameters:

int X = 2;
void foo ( c o n s t a n t int Y ){

w r i t e ( Y );
Y = Y +1;

}
foo ( X );
w r i t e ( X );

What is the most probable behaviour of the interpreter?

5. Say what will be printed by the following code fragment which is written in a

pseudo-language allowing name parameters:

int X = 2;
void foo ( name int Y ){

X ++;
w r i t e ( Y );
X ++;

}
foo ( X +1);
w r i t e ( X );

6. Based on the discussion of the implementation of deep binding using closures,

describe in detail the case of a language with dynamic scope.

7. Consider the following fragment in a language with exceptions and call by value-

result and call by reference:

{ int y =0;

void f ( int x ){
x = x +1;
t h r o w E ;
x = x +1;

}
try { f ( y ); } c a t c h E {};
w r i t e ( y );

}

State what is printed by the program when parameters are passed: (i) by value-
result; (ii) by reference.

8. In a pseudo-language with exceptions, consider the following block of code:

void ecc () t h r o w s X {
t h r o w new X ();

}
void g ( int para ) t h r o w s X {
if ( para == 0) { ecc ();}
try { ecc ();} c a t c h ( X ) { w r i t e ( 3 ) ; }

References

197

}
void main () {

try { g ( 1 ) ; } c a t c h ( X ) { w r i t e ( 1 ) ; }
try { g ( 0 ) ; } c a t c h ( X ) { w r i t e ( 0 ) ; }

}

Say what is printed when main() is executed.

9. The following is deﬁned in a pseudo-language with exceptions:

int f ( int x ){

if ( x ==0) r e t u r n 1;
else if ( x ==1) throw E ;

else if ( x ==2) r e t u r n f (1);

else try { r e t u r n f (x -1);} catch E { r e t u r n x +1;}

}

What is the value that is returned by f(4)?

10. The description of the implementation of exceptions in Sect. 7.3.1 assumes that
the compiler has access (direct or through the linkage phase) to the entire code
of the program. Propose a modiﬁcation to the implementation scheme based
on the handler table for a language in which separate compilation of program
fragments is possible (an example is Java, which allows separate compilation of
classes).

References

1. J.W. Backus, F.L. Bauer, J. Green, C. Katz, J. McCarthy, A.J. Perlis, H. Rutishauser, K. Samel-
son, B. Vauquois, J.H. Wegstein, A. van Wijngaarden, M. Woodger, Report on the algorithmic
language ALGOL 60. Commun. ACM 3(5), 299–314 (1960)

2. N. Wirth, C.A.R. Hoare, A contribution to the development of ALGOL. Commun. ACM 9(6),

413–432 (1966)

3. R.L. Sites, ALGOL W reference manual. Technical Report STAN-CS-71-230, Computer Sci-

ence Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA (1972)

4. N. Wirth, The programming language Pascal. Acta Informatica 1(1), 35–63 (1971)
5. K. Jensen, N. Wirth, Pascal User Manual and Report (Springer, Berlin, 1991)
6. B. Liskov, A history of CLU, in The Second ACM SIGPLAN Conference on History of Pro-
gramming Languages, HOPL-II (Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
1993), pp. 133–147

7. B. Liskov, R. Atkinson, T. Bloom, E. Moss, C. Schaffert, B. Scheiﬂer, A. Snyderw, CLU

reference manual. Technical Report MIT-LCS-TR-225, MIT-LCS (1979)

8. J. Moses, The function of FUNCTION in LISP or why the FUNARG problem should be called

the environment problem. SIGSAM Bull. 15, 13–27 (1970)

9. T.R. Virgilio, R.A. Finkel, Binding strategies and scope rules are independent. Comput. Lang.

7(2), 61–67 (1982)

10. M.D. MacLaren, Exception handling in PL/I, in Proceedings of an ACM Conference on Lan-

guage Design for Reliable Software (1977), pp. 101–104

11. J.B. Goodenough, Exception handling: issues and a proposed notation. Commun. ACM 18(12),

683–696 (1975)

Structuring Data

8

Each programming language provides constructs and mechanisms for structuring
data. Instead of just the simple sequences of bits in the physical machine, a high-
level language provides complex, structured data which more easily describes the
structure of the problems to be solved. These constructs and mechanisms are shaped
by what is called the type system of a language. Far from being an auxiliary aspect,
types represent one of the salient characteristics of a programming language, which
substantially differentiates one language from another.

In this chapter, we will examine type systems in the general sense, discussing
primitive types and the mechanisms used to deﬁne new ones. Central to our presen-
tation will be the concept of type safety, which will be introduced in Sect. 8.2. We
will then tackle the questions of type equivalence and compatibility of types, that
is mechanisms allowing to use a value of some type in a context requiring another
type. We will then discuss polymorphism and overloading. We will conclude the
chapter with some questions about storage management (garbage collection), which
is not, strictly speaking, a topic about data types but which well complements the
examination of pointers which we must undertake.

8.1 Data Types

Data types are present in programming languages for at least three different reasons:

1. At the design level, as support for the conceptual organisation;
2. At the program level, as support for correctness;
3. At the translation level, as support for the implementation.

Before entering into a detailed discussion of these aspects, which we will do in the
coming sections, we give a deﬁnition which, as is often the case with programming

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
M. Gabbrielli and S. Martini, Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms,
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34144-1_8

199

200

8 Structuring Data

languages, is not formally precise but sufﬁces to explain the phenomena which we
intend studying.

Deﬁnition 8.1 (Data Type) A data type is a homogeneous collection of values, effec-
tively presented, equipped with a set of effective operations which manipulate those
values.

Let us clarify the various elements of this deﬁnition. A type is a collection of
values, like the integers, or an integral interval. The adjective “homogeneous”, for all
its informality, suggests that these values must share any structural property which
makes them similar to each other. Next, such values “come with” the operations
which manipulate them. For example, together with the integers, we can consider
the usual operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication and division; or, we may
add also operations such as remainder after integer division and raising to a power.
According to our deﬁnition, the same set of values, equipped with two distinct sets of
operations, forms another data type. Finally, values must be “effectively presented”,
and operations must be “effective.” Since we are speaking of languages for describing
algorithms, we are interested in values which it is possible to present (write, name)
in a ﬁnite manner. Real numbers (the “true” ones in mathematics, that is the only
complete archimedean ordered ﬁeld) are not effectively presentable because there are
real numbers with inﬁnite decimal expansion which cannot be obtained by means of
any algorithm. Their approximations in programming languages (real or float)
are only subsets of the rationals. This presentation is usually ﬁxed, for a given type
in a speciﬁc language (e.g., ﬂoating point numbers are presented as ﬁnite sequences
of digit with a “point”, or with an exponential notation). Finally, operations must be
effective, meaning that there is a mechanical, concrete way of performing them on
the presentation of values.

8.1.1 Types as Support for Conceptual Organisation

The solution to every complex problem has a conceptual structure which often reﬂects
that of the problem. The presence of different types allows the designer to use the type
that is most appropriate to each class of concept. For example, a program handling
hotel reservations, will handle concepts such as client, date, price, rooms, etc. Each
of these concepts can be described as a different type, with its own set of operations.
The designer can deﬁne new types and associate them with different concepts, even
if they are represented by the same values. For example, rooms and prices could be
both represented by integers within speciﬁed intervals, but their representation as
distinct types makes their conceptual difference explicit.

The use of distinct types can be seen both as a design and a documentation tool.
When reading a program, it may be clear from their declaration that a variable of
type “room” has a different role from that of a variable of type “price”. In this sense,
types are similar to comments, with the important difference that—under certain

8.1 Data Types

201

assumptions and in certain programming languages—we are dealing with effectively
checkable comments, as we will see in the next section.

8.1.2 Types for Correctness

Every programming language has its own type-checking rules which regulate the
use of types in a program. For instance, it may be forbidden to add integers and
records, or to call (that is, transfer control to) an object which is not a function or
a procedure. In languages where variables (names) are declared, a common rule is
the one regulating the assignment. For a command of the form x := exp to be
correct, the majority of languages require that the type of exp coincides (or better,
is compatible) with the (declared) type of x.

Such constraints are present in languages both to avoid runtime hardware errors
(for example, a call to an object that is not a function might cause an address error),
and, more likely, to avoid the kinds of logic error frequently hidden beneath type-
rule violations. The sum of an integer and a string rarely corresponds to anything
sensible.

Programming languages, then, assume that the violation of a type constraint cor-
responds to a possible semantic error (a design error). Many languages require that
type constraints must all be satisﬁed before the execution (or the code generation)
of a program. This is the role of the type checker, a very important component of
the static semantic checking phase of a compiler (Sect. 2.3). We referred to types (in
Sect. 8.1.1) as checkable comments. As it is the case for comments, the programmer
uses types to communicate the legal ways with which the given objects can be used;
but (unlike comments), the compiler (or the language’s abstract machine) may detect
and signal attempted incorrect use of these objects.

It is clear that a program that is correct with respect to the type rules can still
be logically incorrect. Types ensure a minimal correctness, which, however, is of
considerable help during the development phase of a program. A powerful analogy
is that of dimensional control in physics: when a physicist writes a formula, before
verifying its correctness using laws, they verify that the dimensions are correct. If
the formula is to express velocity, there must be distance over a time; if there is an
acceleration, there must be distance over time squared. If the formula is dimensionally
incorrect, no more time should be spent on it because it is certainly incorrect. If, on
the other hand, it is dimensionally correct, it might be incorrect and must be handled
semantically.

Sometimes, however, the type rules can appear too restrictive. A C programmer
is used to the free handling of pointers (which are, in C, actual memory locations).
They may ﬁnd the restrictions on performing arbitrary pointer arithmetic such as
those in Java unnecessarily restrictive. In this case, the reply by the designer of Java
is that the beneﬁts of strict control over types considerably outweighs the loss of
expressiveness and conciseness.

A more apt example of the restrictions which could be imposed by a type-system
is that of a sorting subprogram. In some languages, because of the presence of types,

202

8 Structuring Data

it will be necessary to write one routine to order an integer sequence, another to order
sequences of characters, and still another for sequences of reals, and so on. All these
functions are identical as far as algorithm goes and differ only in the declaration of
the types of the parameters and variables. The way out, in this case, is to adopt more
sophisticated typing rules, which, without renouncing any control, allow one to write
a single function which is parameterised by type. We will see below that languages
which allow this kind of polymorphism are becoming common.

A different approach is taken from those languages which postpone at run time
almost all type checks, the notable example being Python. In this way one may obtain
greater ﬂexibility, to the expenses of the amount of static correctness that could be
ensured.

Let us ﬁnally observe that the rules pertaining to types are not always sufﬁcient
to guarantee that the constraints they express are satisﬁed. We give just a single
example here. In a language that permits the explicit deallocation of store in a heap,
it is possible that references (pointers) are generated that refer to memory that is no
longer allocated to the program (dangling references). An attempted access using
such a reference is an error that can be classiﬁed as a type error, but it is not guaranteed
that it will be detected and reported by the abstract machine. Let us therefore classify
programming languages as existing somewhere between secure and insecure with
respect to types, according to how possible it is that there can be type-constraint
violations during program execution that go undetected by the abstract machine.

8.1.3 Types and Implementation

The third motivation for the use of types in programming languages is that they
are important sources of information for the abstract machine. The ﬁrst kind of
information is about the amount of memory to be allocated to various objects. The
compiler can allocate one word for an integer, one byte for a boolean value, n words
for a sequence of n integers, and so on. A type makes this information available.

Moreover, if types are statically determined, this information could be used for
compilation and does not change during execution. As a consequence, we may opti-
mize the access to an object. In Sect. 5.3, we discussed how access to an allocated
variable in an activation record is performed using an offset from the pointer to an
activation record, without a runtime search by name. This form of optimisation is
possible because the information carried by types allows the static determination of
the allocation sizes for almost every object, even for heap-allocated objects. We will
soon see that a record is formed from a collection of ﬁelds, each of which is charac-
terised by its own name and its own type. For example, using the same notation as
in C, the following declaration introduces the Professor type, a record with two
ﬁelds:

s t r u c t P r o f e s s o r {
char Name [20];
int C o u r s e _ c o d e ;

}

8.2 Type Systems

203

If now we have a variable, p, of type Professor, we can access its ﬁelds using
either the name p.Name or the name p.Course_Code. However the object p is
allocated (in the heap or on the stack), access to its ﬁelds will always be possible
through the use of offsets from the start address of p in memory.

8.2 Type Systems

We ﬁrst introduce a little terminology which we will illustrate in detail in the follow-
ing sections. Every programming language has its own type system—the complex
of information and rules which govern the types in that language. More precisely, a
type system consists of the following1 :

1. The set of predeﬁned types of the language.
2. The mechanisms which permit the deﬁnition of new types.
3. The mechanisms for the control of types, among which we distinguish the fol-

lowing:

• Equivalence rules which specify when two formally different types correspond

to the same type.

• Compatibility rules specifying when a value of a one type can be used in a

context in which a different type would be required.

• Rules and techniques for type inference which specify how the language
assigns a type to a complex expression based on information about its com-
ponents.

4. The speciﬁcation as to whether (or which) constraints are statically or dynami-

cally checked.

A type system (and, by extension, a language) is type safe2 when no program can
violate the distinctions between types deﬁned in that language. In other words, a type
system is safe when no program, during its execution, can generate an unsignalled
error derived from a type violation. Once more, it is not always clear what a type
violation is, at least in general. We have already given some examples, such as access
to memory that is not allocated to the program, or the call of a non-functional value.
We will see below other examples of errors of this kind.

We have deﬁned a type as a pair composed of a set of values and a set of operations.
In any particular language, the values of a type can correspond to different syntactic
entities (constants, expressions, etc.). Having ﬁxed a programming language, we can

1 “A type system is a tractable syntactic method for proving the absence of certain program behaviors
by classifying phrases according to the kinds of values they compute” [1].
2 Much of the literature uses the term strongly typed in place of type safe.

204

8 Structuring Data

classify its types according to how the values of a type can be manipulated and the
kinds of syntactic entity that corresponds to these values. Following the classiﬁcation
that we have already seen in the box on Sect. 6.2.2, we have values:

• Denotable, if they can be associated with a name.
• Expressible if they can be the result of a complex expression (that is different from

a simple name).

• Storable if they can be stored in a variable.

Let us give some examples. Values of type integer are in general denotable (they
can be associated with constants), expressible, and storable. The values of the type
of functions from int to int are denotable in almost all languages because a name
can be given using a declaration. For example:

int succ ( int x ){
r e t u r n x +1;

}

This assigns a name succ to the function which computes the successor. Functional
values are not always expressible in common imperative languages because there
are no complex expressions returning a function as the result of their evaluation. In
the same way, they are not, in general, storable values because it is not possible to
assign a function to a variable. The situation is different in languages from other
paradigms, for example functional languages (Scheme, ML, Haskell, etc.) in which
functional values are both denotable, and expressible or, in some languages, storable.
In Python, any value is denotable, expressible and may be assigned at run-time to a
name.

8.2.1 Static and Dynamic Checking

A language has static typing if its checking of type constraints can be conducted
on the program text at compile time. Otherwise, it has dynamic typing (that is if
checking happens at runtime).

Dynamic type checking assumes that every object (value) have a runtime descrip-
tor specifying its type. The abstract machine is responsible for checking that every
operation is applied only to operands of the correct type. Often, this can be done by
making the compiler generate appropriate checking code that is executed before each
operation. It is not difﬁcult to see that dynamic type checking locates type errors but
is not efﬁcient, given that operations are intermixed with type checking. In addition,
a possible type error is revealed only during execution when the program might be
in operation with its end user.

In static type checking, on the other hand, checks are made during compilation.
In this scheme, checks are performed and reported to the programmer before the
program is sent to the user. When checking is completely static, moreover, the explicit
maintenance of type information at execution time is useless because correctness
is guaranteed statically for every execution sequence. Execution is therefore more

8.3 Scalar Types

205

efﬁcient, given that checks are not required at runtime. There is, clearly, a price to
pay. In the ﬁrst place, the design of a statically-typed language is more complex than
that of a dynamic language, especially if, together with static checking, guaranteed
type safety is also desired. In the second place, compilation takes longer and is more
complex, a price that one pays willingly, given that compilation takes place only a
few times (with respect to the number of times that the program will be executed)
and, above all because type checking shortens the testing and debugging phases.

There is, in the end, a third price to pay. This is less evident than the others but is
intimately connected with the nature of static type checking. Static types can decree
as erroneous, programs that, in reality, do not cause a runtime type error. By way of
a simple example, let us consider the following fragment in our pseudocode:

int x ;
if ( 0 = = 1 ) x = " p i p p o " ;
else x = 3+4;

The ﬁrst branch of the conditional assigns the integer variable, x, to a value that is
incompatible with its type but the execution of the fragment causes no error because
the condition is never satisﬁed. However, every static type checker will signal that
this fragment is incorrect because the types of the two conditional branches are not
the same. Static checking is therefore more conservative than dynamic checking.
The motivation for this statement is found in the considerations of Chap. 3 on the
existence of undecidable problems. In addition to the halting problem, the problem of
determining whether a program causes a type error at execution time is undecidable
(see the box on “Type errors are undecidable”). It follows from this that there exists
no static check that can determine all and only those programs that produce errors at
runtime. Static typing therefore adopts a prudential position: that of excluding more
programs than strictly necessary with the justiﬁcation that it can therefore guarantee
correctness.

As we have already seen more than once in other contexts, static and dynamic
type checking represent the two extremes of a spectrum of solutions in which the
two methods coexist. Almost every high-level language combines static and dynamic
type checks. We promise to return to this topic in due course; meanwhile let us just
give a simple example from Pascal, a language traditionally classiﬁed as one that uses
static type checking. Pascal allows the deﬁnition of interval types (see Sect. 8.3.9).
For example, 1..10 is the type of the integers between 1 and 10 (inclusive). An
expression of an interval type must be checked dynamically to guarantee that its
value is properly contained within the interval. More generally, if a language with
arrays want to check that the index of an array lies between the bounds of that array,
must perform checks at runtime.

8.3 Scalar Types

Scalar (or simple) types are those types whose values are not composed of aggre-
gations of other values. In this section, we will undertake a quick review of the

206

8 Structuring Data

Type Errors are Undecidable

It is not difﬁcult to prove that the problem of determining whether a program will cause a type
error during its execution is undecidable. Let us, in fact, make use of what we already know, the
undecidability of the halting problem.

Let us consider the following fragment, where P is an arbitrary (type-correct) program:

int x ;
P ;
x = " p i p p o " ;

Under what conditions will this fragment produce a type error as it runs? Only if P terminates,

in which case it will try to execute the assignment:

x = " p i p p o " ;

which clearly violates the type system. If, on the other hand, P does not terminate, it will produce
no error because control remains always inside P without ever reaching the critical assignment.
Therefore, the fragment generates a type error if and only if P terminates. If there now existed a
general method for deciding whether an arbitrary program causes an type error while executing,
we could apply this method to our fragment. Such a method, though, would also be a method for
deciding the termination of the (arbitrary) program P, something we know to be impossible.

main scalar types found in most common programming languages, while, in the next
section, we will be concerned with the types that result from aggregating different
values. The details (which we will not give) clearly depend on speciﬁc languages.
In order to ﬁx our notation, let us assume that we have in our pseudo-language the
following way of deﬁning (or declaring) new types:

type n e w t y p e = expression;

This introduces the name of the type, newtype, whose structure is given by
expression. In C, we would write, for the same meaning:

t y p e d e f expression n e w t y p e ;

8.3.1 Booleans

The type of logical values, or booleans, is composed of:

• Values: The two truth values, true and false.
• Operations: an appropriate selection from the main logical operations: conjunction

(and), disjunction (or) and negation (not), equality, exclusive or, etc.

If present, its values can be stored, expressed and denoted. For reasons of addressing,
the memory representation does not consist of a single bit but of a byte (or possibly
more if alignment is required).

8.3 Scalar Types

8.3.2 Characters

The character type is composed of:

207

• Values: a set of character codes, ﬁxed when the language is deﬁned; the most

common of these are ASCII and UNICODE.

• Operations: strongly dependent upon the language; we always ﬁnd equality, com-
parison and some way to move from a character to its successor (according to the
ﬁxed encoding) and/or to its predecessor.

Values can be stored, expressed and denoted. The representation in store will consist
of a single byte (ASCII) or of a variable numbers of bytes or words (UNICODE,
with its character encodings UTF-8, UTF-16 or UTF-32).

8.3.3 Integers

The type of integer numbers is composed of:

• Values: In most cases a ﬁnite subset of the integers, usually ﬁxed when the language
is deﬁned (but there are cases in which it is determined by the abstract machine,
which can be the cause of some portability problems). Due to representation issues,
an interval of the form [−2t , 2t − 1] is commonly used. Python (together with a
handful of other languages) assumes that the values of the int type are the true
mathematical integers (hence an inﬁnite set).

• Operations: the comparisons and an appropriate selection of the main arithmetic
operators (addition, subtraction, multiplication, integer division, remainder after
division, exponentiation, etc.).

The values can be stored, expressed and denoted. In most languages the represen-
tation in memory consists of an even number of bytes (usually 2, 4, or 8), in two’s
complement form. Python (and the languages which support arbitrary-length inte-
gers) must use a different representation, spreading a single integer value onto a
variable number of memory words.

8.3.4 Reals

The so-called real (or ﬂoating point) type is composed of:

• Values: an appropriate subset of the rational numbers, usually ﬁxed when the
language is deﬁned (but there are case in which it is ﬁxed by the speciﬁc abstract
machine, a matter that deeply affects portability); the structure (size, granularity,
etc.) of such a subset depends on the representation adopted.

208

Empty or Singleton

8 Structuring Data

At ﬁrst sight, one might be confused by the statement that void has one (a single) element rather
than none. Let us think a little. We are used to deﬁning a function which “returns nothing” as:

void f ( . . . ) { . . . }

If void were the empty set, we could not write a function such as f. There exist no functions
with an empty codomain, with the unique exception of the function that is everywhere divergent.
It is, instead, sensible to assume that in void, there is a single element and that this (implicitly) is
returned by f. Since such an element is unique, we have no (and we must not have any) interest
in explicitly saying what it is. Python makes this explicit, with the object None, the unique value
of type NoneType, which is returned by any function which does not (explicitly) returns another
value.

• Operations: comparisons and an appropriate selection of the main numeric opera-
tions (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, exponentiation, square roots,
etc.).

The values can be stored, expressed and denoted. The memory representation consists
of four, eight and also ten bytes, in ﬂoating point format as speciﬁed by the IEEE
754 standard.

8.3.5 Fixed Point

The so-called ﬁxed point type for reals is composed of:

• Values: an appropriate subset of the rational numbers, usually ﬁxed when the
language is deﬁned; the structure (size, granularity, etc.) of such a subset depends
on the representation adopted.

• Operations: comparisons and an appropriate selection of the main numeric opera-
tions (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, exponentiation, extraction of
square roots, etc.).

The values can be stored, expressed and denoted. The representation in memory
consists of four or eight bytes. Values are represented in two’s complement, with
a ﬁxed number of bits reserved for the decimal part. Reals in ﬁxed point permit
compact representation over a wide interval with few precision places.

8.3 Scalar Types

Enumerations in C

209

In C, our deﬁnition of Dwarf takes the form:

enum Dwarf { Bashful , Doc , Dopey , Grumpy , Happy , Sleepy , S n e e z y };

Apart from notational variants, the essential point is that in C (but not in C++), such a

declaration is substantially equivalent to the following:

t y p e d e f int D w a r f ;
c o n s t D w a r f B a s h f u l =0 , Doc =1 , D o p e y =2 ,

G r u m p y =3 , H a p p y =4 , S l e e p y =5 , S n e e z y =6;

The type equivalence rules for the language, in other words, allow an integer to be used in
place of a Dwarf and vice versa. Type checking does not distinguish between the two types and,
therefore, better documentation is all that is obtained by the use of an enumeration; stronger type
checking is not obtained. In languages derived from Pascal, on the other hand, enumerations and
integers are different types.

8.3.6 Complex

The so-called complex type is composed of:

• Values: an appropriate subset of the complex numbers, usually ﬁxed by the deﬁ-
nition of the language; the structure (size, granularity, etc.) of this subset depends
on the adopted representation.

• Operations: comparisons and an appropriate selection of the main numerical oper-
ations (sum, subtraction, multiplication, division, exponentiation, taking of square
roots, etc.).

The values can be stored, expressed and denoted. The representation consists of

a pair of ﬂoating-point values.

8.3.7 Unit

In some languages, there exists a primitive type whose semantics is that of having a
single value. It is sometimes denoted void (even if, semantically, it would be better
to call it unit, given that it is not the empty set but a singleton):

• Values: only one, which can be written as (), or None.
• Operations: none.

It is used to denote the type of operations that modify the state but return no value.
For example, in some languages, (but not in C, Java or Python), assignments (are
also expressions and) have type void.

210

8 Structuring Data

8.3.8 Enumerations

Some languages allow the user to deﬁne new scalar types, the most common example
being enumerations and intervals.

An enumeration type consists of a ﬁxed set of constants, each characterized by

its own name. In our pseudo-language, we could write the following deﬁnition

type Dwarf = { Bashful , Doc , Dopey , Grumpy , Happy , Sleepy , S n e e z y };

which introduces a new type with the name Dwarf and is a set of seven elements,
each one denoted by its own name.

The operations available over an enumeration consist of comparisons and of a
mechanism to move from a value to its successor and/or predecessor value (this
should be compared with what was said about the character type).

From a pragmatic viewpoint, enumerations permit the creation of highly legible
programs insofar as the names for values constitute a fairly clear form of self docu-
mentation of the program. Type checking moreover can be exploited to check that a
variable of an enumeration type assumes only the correct values.

Introduced for the ﬁrst time in Pascal, enumeration types are present in many

other languages; the box discusses those in C.

A value of an enumeration type is typically represented by a one-byte integer.
The individual values are represented by contiguous values, starting at zero. Some
languages (C and Ada for example) allow the programmer to choose the values
corresponding to the different elements of an enumeration.

8.3.9 Intervals

The values of an interval (or range) type form a contiguous subset of the values of
another scalar type (the base type of the interval). Two examples in Pascal (which
was the ﬁrst language to introduce intervals as well as enumerations) are:

type B i n g o = 1 . . 9 0 ;

S o m e D w a r v e s = G r u m p y .. S l e e p y ;

In the ﬁrst case, the Bingo type is an interval of 90 elements whose base type is
the integer type. The interval SomeDwarves is formed from the values Grumpy,
Happy and Sleepy and has Dwarf as its base type.

As in the case of enumerations, the advantage of using an interval type rather than
the corresponding base type is both that it is better for documentation and because it
provides a stronger type check. It can be seen that verifying that a value of a certain
expression really belongs to the interval must necessarily be made dynamically,
even in those languages whose type system is designed for the static checking of
type constraints.

As far as representation goes, a compiler can represent a value of an interval type
as a one- or two-byte integer according to the number of elements in the interval.

8.4 Composite Types

211

In reality, usually an abstract machine will represent the values of an interval in the
same way (and in the same number of bytes) in which the base type is represented.

8.3.10 Ordered Types

The boolean, character, integer, enumeration and interval types are examples of
ordered types (or discrete types). They are equipped with a well-deﬁned concept of
total order and, above all, possess a concept of predecessor and successor for every
element, except for the extreme values. Ordered types are a natural choice for array
indices and for control variables of bounded iterations (see Sect. 6.3.3).

8.4 Composite Types

Non-scalar types are said to be composite since they are obtained by combining other
types using appropriate constructors. The most important and common composite
types are:

• Record (or structure), an ordered collection of values in general of different type.
• Union and tagged union (or variant), a collection resulting from the union of other

types.

• Array (or vector), an ordered collection of values of the same type.
• Set: subsets of a base type, generally ordinal types.
• Pointer: l-values which permit access to data of another type.
• Sequence: ﬁnite sequences of values (of any type).
• Recursive type: types deﬁned by recursion, using constants and constructors; par-

ticular cases of recursive types are lists, trees, etc.

In the following subsections, we will analyse these types in the same order as in the
above list.

8.4.1 Records

A record is a collection formed from a ﬁnite number of (in general ordered) elements
called ﬁelds, which are distinguished by name. Each ﬁeld can be of a type that is
different from the others (records are a heterogeneous data structure). In the majority
of imperative languages, each ﬁeld behaves like a variable of the same type.3 The

3 In many non-imperative languages, a record is, instead, a ﬁnite set of values each of which is
accessed by name. Ignoring the question of name-based access, a record type, in such a case, is the
cartesian product of the types of its ﬁelds.

212

8 Structuring Data

terminology is not, as usual, universal. In Pascal, one talks about records, in C (C++,
Algol 68, etc.), one talks about structures (struct); in Java or Python, they do
not exist because they are subsumed by the concept of class.

A simple example in our pseudo-language (inspired by C’s notation) is the fol-

lowing:

type S t u d e n t = s t r u c t {

int year ;
f l o a t h e i g h t ;

};

Each record of type Student is composed of a pair whose ﬁrst component is an

integer, while the second is a real (ﬂoat).

The only operation usually permitted on a value of a record type is the selection
of a component, which can be obtained using the name of the ﬁelds. For example, if
s is a name that refers to a Student, we can assign values to its ﬁelds as follows:

s . y e a r = 1 2 3 4 5 ;
s . h e i g h t = 1 . 8 5 ;

In many languages, records can be nested, that is the ﬁeld of a record is permitted

to be of a record type.

type Hall = s t r u c t {

char name [5];
int c a p a c i t y ;
s t r u c t {

char d e p a r t m e n t [ 1 0 ] ;
int t e l e p h o n e ;

} m a n a g e r ;

};

The third ﬁeld (manager) of a record of type Hall is a record with two ﬁelds
(whose type, anonymous, is therefore also a struct; the convention is observed
that the type occurs before the name being declared). The selection of ﬁelds is
performed by an obvious extension of the dot notation: if h refers to a Hall,
with h.manager.telephone, we can denote the second ﬁeld of the third ﬁeld
(manager) of h.

Equality of records is not always deﬁned (Ada permits it but Pascal, C, C++ do
not). Similarly, assignment of entire records is not always permitted. In the case in
which these operations are not permitted, the language user must explicitly program
them, for example by comparing (or assigning) one ﬁeld at a time.

The order of ﬁelds is, in general, signiﬁcant and is reﬂected in the way in which
records are stored. The ﬁelds of a record are stored in contiguous locations, even if
reasons of alignment can insert a hole between one ﬁeld and another. For example,
in a 32-bit architecture a record of type Hall could be represented by as shown
in Fig. 8.1. The name ﬁeld is represented by 5 bytes. The following ﬁeld, however,
being an integer, must be aligned on a word boundary and therefore between name
and capacity, 3 empty bytes must be left. A similar thing happens with ﬁelds
department and telephone. A record of type Hall is therefore represented

8.4 Composite Types

Fig. 8.1 Possible storage
arrangement for a record of
type Hall

213

by 7 words each of 4 bytes, even though only 23 bytes are signiﬁcant.4 To avoid these
problems, some languages do not ensure that the order of ﬁelds will be maintained
by the abstract machine, thus allowing the compiler to re-organise ﬁelds in order
to minimise the number of holes required to enforce alignment. Our record of type
Hall could be represented in 6 words, with the waste of a single byte. This is a
good implementation if the language guarantees a signiﬁcant level of abstraction
between the user and the implementation. In some applications, on the other hand,
there is the need to allow users to manipulate the implementation of types. Languages
such as C are designed also to allow this kind of manipulation—in such cases, the
reorganisation of ﬁelds would not be a good design decision.

8.4.2 Unions

When runtime central-memory was an expensive resource, it was useful to have
types akin to records, but where ﬁelds would be mutually exclusive, to save memory
space. Called variant records in Pascal, the concept survives in C union types. An
(untagged) union is analogous to a record (struct) in deﬁnition and in selection
of its ﬁelds, with the fundamental difference that only one of the ﬁelds of a union
can be active at any particular time, given that the ﬁelds (which can be declared of
different types) share the same area of storage. We will be content with a simple
example. In the scope of the following C deﬁnition

u n i o n E x a m p l e {

int l a s t y e a r ;
s t r u c t {

f l o a t h e i g h t ;
int year ;

} s t u d e n t ;

};

any variable ex of type Example would take only two memory words, see Fig. 8.2.
At any single time of the execution, either the ﬁrst of these two words is signiﬁcant, or
both. In the former case, only the ﬁeld ex.lastyear makes sense, as an integer. In

4 The presence of holes is often the reason for which some languages do not permit equality between
entire records. A bit-by-bit comparison of two records would distinguish two records which are in
reality equal apart from the irrelevant information present in the holes.

214

8 Structuring Data

Secure Union: Algol 68

Is it possible to design secure variant records such that they do not threaten the very roots of the
language’s type system? The reply is certainly positive, provided we are willing to pay the price,
both linguistically and in terms of efﬁciency. Let us discuss here in summary form the Algol 68
solution. Algol 68 allows the deﬁnition of union types and requires the abstract machine to follow
the evolution of the type of any variable of union type.

u n i o n ( int , bool , char ) tmp ; # tmp of union type #
...
tmp := true ; # now tmp is of type b o o l e a n #
...
tmp := 123;

# now tmp is an i n t e g e r #

For every variable of union type, the abstract machine maintains a hidden type tag which
is implicitly set when an assignment occurs. The crucial point is that a union can be used only
through a “conformity clause” (a case) which speciﬁes what to do with this variable in all cases.
For example:

case tmp in

: a := a +1 ,

( int a )
( bool b ) : b := not b ,
( char c ) : p r i n t ( c )

esac

A conformity clause is the only construct in the language that generate type checks for dynamic

types.

Fig. 8.2 The two possible storage allocations for a union type

the latter, the ﬁrst word would be interpreted as the ﬂoat for ex.student.height,
while the second word would be the integer for ex.student.year. Which
of the two cases is signiﬁcant at any single moment is sole responsibility of the
programmer—the language does not (and cannot) provide any support for type-
checking.

Union types in this form are a signiﬁcant threat to type safety, since there is no
way to connect a reference to a union value to its actual type and representation, even
at run-time. On the other hand, nowadays unions are of little use to save on memory
usage. For this reason, untagged union types (variant records) gradually disappear
from major languages, while an alternative, safe design choice is discussed in the
following section.

8.4 Composite Types

8.4.3 Tagged Unions

215

A tagged union is the union of several other types, where, however, each value
maintains trace of the original type it comes from. It is the modern evolution of
Algol 68’s unions (see the box on Sect. 8.4.2) and Pascal’s enumerations and variant
records. Popular ﬁrst in functional languages, tagged unions are now available in most
modern languages. Let us take the following as a simple example

type T h r e e =

n of int | b of bool | st of char ;

A value of type Three is either an integer, a boolean value, or a character, together
with a type tag (a name) which discriminates the three cases. The deﬁnition above
makes explicit that n is the integer tag, b is the boolean tag, and st is the character
tag. After the declaration

T h r e e V = st ’ A ’

the name V is bound to the value st ’a’ of type Three. Whenever a value of
Three is used, it must be checked against the possible tags it may have. The follow-
ing fragment updates V, incrementing it of one if it is bound to an integer, negating
it if it is a boolean, or ﬁnally leaving it unchanged if it is a character:

V = case V in

n x : n ( x +1)
b x : b ( not x )
st x : st x

end case

Tagged unions are the programming language version of what type theory calls
sum types. Enumerations, as discussed in Sect. 8.3.8, are a degenerate case of tagged
unions, built over unit types (see Sect. 8.3.7)—the only interesting information are
the very tags, not the corresponding values. Our enumeration type

type Dwarf = { Bashful , Doc , Dopey , Grumpy , Happy , Sleepy , S n e e z y };

is shorthand for the tagged union

type D w a r f = B a s h f u l of unit | Doc of unit | . . . |

S n e e z y of unit ;

Values of a tagged union are always represented storing also the tag, which is
exploited at run time whenever a discriminating case is used.

Option Types

Besides enumerations, a particularly interesting case of tagged unions are the so-
called option types, as present, e.g., in Scala. Given a type T, the type

O p t i o n [ T ]

could be seen as shorthand for the tagged union

None of unit | Some of T

The rationale for the introduction of option types into a language is the opportunity
to treat in a coherent way the result types of functions with special (or error) cases.

216

8 Structuring Data

Consider a function find(S, e), returning the ﬁrst index where the element e
occurs in the sequence S. What value should be returned if e is not present in S?
With option types we could declare

O p t i o n [ int ] f i n d ( s e q u e n c e S , int e ){

... }

and make find return None when e is not in S; if, on the other hand, e occurs as
S[i], we make find return Some(i). Anytime find is called, we may match
its result against the tags None or Some, discriminating in this way the possible
“error” case.

8.4.4 Arrays

An array (or vector) is a ﬁnite collection of elements of the same type, indexed by an
interval of ordinal type.5 Each element behaves as if it were a (modiﬁable) variable
(see Sect. 6.2.1) of the same type. The ordinal interval of the indices is the index
type, or the type of the array indices. The type of the elements is the component type,
or even, with a little imprecision, the array type. Since all elements are of the same
type, arrays are homogeneous data types.

Arrays are among the most common composite type found in programming lan-
guages; they ﬁrst appeared in FORTRAN, the progenitor of all high-level languages.
The syntax and various characteristics of arrays, however, vary considerably from
language to language. The fundamental ingredients of array declarations are its name,
its index type and the type of its elements. Let us begin with one of the simplest exam-
ples we can produce in C:

int V [ 1 0 ] ;

The square brackets after the name of the variable indicate that we are dealing with
an array formed from 10 elements, each of which is a variable of type integer (from
now on, we will simply say: an array of 10 integers). The element type is therefore
int, while the index type is an interval of 10 elements; using the convention adopted
in many languages (C, C++, Java, etc.), this interval starts at 0. In this case, therefore,
the index type is the interval 0–9. In general, we can assume that a language allows
the declaration of the index type to be an arbitrary interval of an ordinal type, for
example:

int W [ 2 1 . . 3 0 ] ;
type Dwarf = { Bashful , Doc , Dopey , Grumpy , Happy , Sleepy ,

S n e e z y };
float Z [ D o p e y .. S n e e z y ];

In the ﬁrst declaration, W is an array of 10 integers, with integer indices from 21 to
30. The last line declares Z, an array of 4 reals, with indices taken from the Dwarf
type that run Dopey to Sneezy.

5 From a semantic viewpoint, an array is a function which has, as domain, an interval for the indices
and, as codomain, a type for the array elements.

8.4 Composite Types

217

All languages permit the deﬁnition of multidimensional arrays, that is arrays

indexed by two or more indices:

int V [ 1 . . 1 0 , 1 . . 1 0 ] ;
char C [ D o p e y .. Sleepy , 0 . . 1 0 , 1 . . 1 0 ] ;

The array V is a 10 × 10 square integer matrix, with row and column indices
running from 1 to 10; C is a matrix whose elements are characters and whose bounds
are 4 × 11 × 10.

In some languages, a multidimensional array can be obtained by declaring that
the type of the array elements is, at the same time, an array. A possible syntax in our
pseudo-language could be the following, so we can declare the above as:

int V [ 1 . . 1 0 ] [ 1 . . 1 0 ] ;
char C [ D o p e y .. S l e e p y ] [ 0 . . 1 0 ] [ 1 . . 1 0 ] ;

In some languages, the two models (multidimensional array and array of array)
are equivalent (one is an abbreviation for the other). In other languages, only one of
the two possibilities is admitted. In C, a multidimensional array is an array of arrays
and must be declared as such. Other languages, ﬁnally, allow both models, but arrays
of arrays may support additional operations (e.g., slicing, as will shortly be seen)
that are not deﬁned over multidimensional arrays.

Operations on Arrays

The simplest operation permitted on an array is element selection. It is performed
using an index variable. The most common notation uses square brackets: W[e]
indicates the element of W corresponding to the index denoted by the value of the
expression e. For multidimensional arrays, it is possible to ﬁnd C[Grumpy,1,2] or
C[Grumpy][1][2], depending on whether the emphasis is on multidimensional
or arrays of arrays.

Some languages, furthermore, allow operations on arrays in their entirety: assign-
ment, equality, comparisons and also arithmetic operations (performed, in general,
elementwise). In other languages, these global operations are just one particular case
of operations that allow the selection of interior parts of an array, which is oper-
ated on in a global fashion. An array slice is a portion of an array composed of
(in general contiguous, but with exceptions) elements. With the declarations above,
V[3] could indicate the third row of the matrix V, and C[Grumpy] the plane of
the 3-dimensional matrix C which is obtained by selecting only its ﬁrst component
(Fig. 8.3). Languages may allow the selection of more sophisticated slices: diagonals,
frames, etc.

Checking

The speciﬁcation of the index type of an array is an integral part of its deﬁnition.
Type checking in the language, therefore, would have to verify that every access of
an element of a vector really happens “between the bounds” of the array and that
there is no attempt to access elements that do not exist. With the exception of some
special cases, this check can occur only at runtime. A secure language, therefore,

218

8 Structuring Data

Fig. 8.3 A slice through an
array

will have to ensure that the compiler generates appropriate checks for every access.
Since this checking will affect the efﬁciency of the program, some languages, while
permitting such checks to be generated, allow their deactivation.

Let us observe, by the way, that we are dealing with a of matter of not insigniﬁcant
importance to the security of a system, understood not just as “type safety”, but as
“security” in a real sense. One of the most common attacks, which is also one of the
most serious for the security of a system, is called buffer overﬂow. A malicious agent
sends messages across the network with the aim of having them read into the buffers
of the destination. If the destination does not check that the length of messages does
not exceed the capacity of the buffer, the malicious sender can write into an area of
memory that is not allocated to the buffers. If the buffer is allocated in an activation
record and the sender succeeds in writing into the area the activation record reserves
for saving the procedure’s return address, a “return” to any instruction can be made,
in particular it can be made to jump to malicious code loaded by the attacker on
purpose (for example in the same buffer that caused the overﬂow). In almost all
cases, a buffer overﬂow attack can be stopped by an abstract machine that checks
that every access to an array happens “between the bounds”.

Storage and Calculation of Indices

An array is usually stored as a contiguous portion of memory (see Exercise 2 for
a non-contiguous allocation technique). For a single-dimensional array, allocation
follows the order of the indices. In the case of a multidimensional array, there are two
alternative techniques, referred to as storage in row-major order and in column-major
order. In row-major order, two elements are contiguous when they differ in their last
index (except in the case of elements at the extremes of a row, or on a plane, etc.).
In column-major order, two elements are contiguous if they differ in the ﬁrst index
(except in the case of extremal elements). Row-major order is a little more common
than column-major order (which is the storage standard of FORTRAN and, more
recently, MATLAB). The fact that the elements of a row are stored contiguously
makes the selection of a row slice easier (this is the slicing operation that is most
often provided).

The two storing techniques are not equivalent as far as efﬁciency is concerned,
particularly when there is a cache. Programs that manipulate large multidimensional
arrays are often characterised by nested loops that run over such arrays. If the array

8.4 Composite Types

219

cannot be stored entirely in a cache, it is important that its elements are accessed
“along” the cache, such that the ﬁrst miss brings into the cache the elements that
will be accessed immediately after. If the loop works by row, the cache must also be
loaded by row, that is, row-major order is more convenient; if the loop is columnwise,
column-major order should be preferred.

Once an array is stored in a contiguous fashion, the calculation of the address cor-
responding to an arbitrary element is not difﬁcult, even if it requires a little arithmetic.
Let us consider the generic array of n dimensions, with elements of type T.
T V [ L 1 ..U1 ]. . .[ L n ..Un ];

Let Sn be the number of the addressable units (typically: bytes) necessary to store
a single element of type T. Starting from this value, we can successively calculate a
series of values which express the quantity of memory required to store increasingly
larger slices of V. Let us assume we are working in row-major order, so we have:
Sn−1 = (Un − L n + 1)Sn,

. . .
S1 = (U2 − L 2 + 1)S2.
For example, for n = 3, S3 is the amount of memory required to store a single
element, S2 is the amount required to store a row, while S1 is the amount required
to store an entire plane of V. The values S j are usually called the strides (or stride
factors) of the array.

The address of element V[i1, . . . , in] is now obtained by adding to the ﬁrst

address used to store V the quantity:

(i1 − L 1)S1 + · · · + (in − L n)Sn.
If the number of dimensions (that is, n), and the value of the L j and U j are all
known at compile time (that is the shape of the array is static, see next section), it is
convenient to rewrite the addressing expression as:

i1 S1 + · · · + in Sn − (L 1 S1 + · · · + L n Sn).
Here, the second part (in parentheses), and a fortiori, all the S j are constants that
can be determined at compile time. Making use of this formulation, an address is
calculated (dynamically) with n multiplications and n additions. The ﬁnal subtraction
disappears whenever all the L j are zero (which explains why some languages use
zero as lower bound for indices).

(8.1)

Shape of an Array: Where an Array is Allocated

The shape of an array is given by the number of its dimensions and by the interval
within which each of them can vary. An important aspect of the deﬁnition of a
language is the decision about when the form of an array is ﬁxed. Corresponding to
the three principal cases, we also have three different models for allocating arrays in
memory:

• Static shape. Everything is decided at compile time; the array can be stored in
the activation record of the block in which its declaration appears (or in the static

220

8 Structuring Data

Fig. 8.4 Structure of an activation record with a dope vector

memory allocated for globals, if used). Let us observe that in this case, the total
dimension required for an array is a constant that is known at compile time. The
offset from the address of the array’s start and the ﬁxed point in the activation
record to which the activation record pointer points is also therefore a constant
(this was explained in Sect. 5.3.3). Access to an element of the array differs from
access to an ordinary (scalar) variable only by the quantity determined by (8.1).
• Shape ﬁxed at declaration time. In this case, the shape is not deﬁned at compile
time but is recorded and ﬁxed when execution reaches the array declaration (for
example, the interval of the index depends on the value of a variable). In this case,
too, the array can be allocated in the activation record of the block in which its
declaration appears, but the compiler has no way of knowing what the offset is
between the start of the array and the ﬁxed point of the activation record to which
the frame pointer refers. This is an unpleasant position because it could have
repercussions for other, completely static, data structures which were allocated in
the activation record after such an array whose shape is ﬁxed only at declaration
time. To avoid this problem, an activation record is divided into two parts: one part
for ﬁxed-length data, and the other for variable-length data. Access to all the data
allocated in the ﬁxed-length part is performed in the usual fashion. On the other
hand, when accessing a variable-length data item, an indirection through a data
descriptor is performed. The descriptor is contained in the ﬁxed-length part which
is accessed by offset and contains, amongst other things, a pointer to the start of
the data structure (in our case, an array). Figure 8.4 shows a scheme for allocation
inside an activation record for this. The descriptor for an array is known as a dope
vector. We will describe dope vectors in a little more detail in a short while.
• Dynamic shape. In this case, an array can change shape after its creation as a result
of the effects of execution. Stack allocation is no longer possible because the
size and structure of an activation record would have to be dynamically modiﬁed.
Dynamic arrays must therefore be allocated on the heap, while a pointer to the
start of the array remains stored in the ﬁxed-length part of the activation record.

8.4 Composite Types

Arrays in Java

221

In Java, an array is not created at the same time as the declaration of a variable of array type.
The declaration int[] v; introduces only the name v. It is not associated with any data structure
(more precisely, this is the same as for any declaration of a variable of class type). The data structure
is created on the heap using the predeﬁned new operation: v = new int[10]; creates in the
heap a new array of 10 integers and assigns a reference to them to the name v. Multidimensional
arrays are not stored contiguously. Using a technique similar to that discussed below for dynamic
sequences, they are stored using multiple layers of indirect pointers (see Sect. 8.4.7).

An array in Java is an object in the strict sense of the term as understood for that language. It

has unlimited lifetime.

To conclude the argument, let us argue that, in addition to the static or dynamic nature
of the shape, the decision on allocation of an array must also take its lifetime into
account. An array allocated in an activation record has a lifetime limited to that of
the block in which it is declared. In languages that allow the creation of arrays with
unlimited lifetimes (for example, Java) they must be allocated on the heap.

Dope Vectors

The descriptor of an array whose shape is not known statically (and which can either
be ﬁxed at execution time or be completely dynamic) is called a dope vector. A dope
vector, which is usually allocated in the ﬁxed-length part of an activation record
contains the following components:

• A pointer to the ﬁrst location at which the array is stored;
• All the dynamic information required to perform the calculation in expression
(8.1): the number of dimensions (also called the rank of the array), the value of the
lower limit of each dimension (the L j ), the occupation of each dimension (the S j ).

If some of these values are known statically, they are not explicitly stored. The
dope vector is initialised when the array is created (using appropriate calculations
of the values S j ). To access an element of the array, the dope vector is accessed (by
an offset from the frame pointer), expression (8.1) is computed and is added (via an
indirect access) to the address of the start of the array.

8.4.5 Sets

Some programming languages allow the deﬁnition of set types, whose values are
composed of subsets of a base type (or universe), usually restricted to an ordinal
type. For example, we may have:

set of char S ;
set of D w a r f N ;

We have a variable S which is a subset of the characters and a variable N which will
contain a subset of the type Dwarf, as deﬁned on Sect. 8.3.8. Languages allowing

222

8 Structuring Data

sets provide appropriate syntax for assigning a speciﬁc subset to a variable, for
example:

N = {Grumpy, Sleepy};

The possible operations on values of set type set are the membership test (the
test that an element belongs to a set) and the usual set-theoretic operations of union,
intersection and difference; complement is not always provided.

A set may be represented as a bit vector (the characteristic vector of the set)
whose length is the same as the cardinality of the base type. For example, a subset of
char, in an implementation that uses the ASCII 7-bit code, would be represented
as 128 bits. If, in the characteristic vector, the jth bit is set, it indicates that the jth
element of the base type (in the standard enumeration) is in the set; otherwise, a bit
equal to zero indicates that the corresponding element is not in the set. Although
this representation permits the highly efﬁcient execution of set-theoretic operations
(as bitwise operations on the physical machine), it is clear that it is completely
inappropriate for subsets of types whose base type has a cardinality greater than a
few hundred. To obviate this problem, languages often limit the types that can be
used as base for set types. Or rather, they select other representations (for example,
hash tables), which will support the representation of the set in a more compact
fashion.

8.4.6 Pointers

Some languages permit the direct manipulation of l-values. The corresponding type
is called a pointer type—if T is a type, it is possible to deﬁne the type of “pointers
to (variables/values of type) T”. It should be noted that, in this context, we will be
interested in pointers as far as they are explicitly present in the language, in contrast
to the obvious presence of addresses (pointers) in the abstract machine.

In a language with a reference model for variables (see Sect. 6.2.1), pointer types
are not necessary (or required). Every variable is always a reference, or rather it
is considered as an l-value, even if this value cannot explicitly be manipulated. In
languages with modiﬁable variables, on the other hand, pointers provide a way of
referring to an l-value without automatically dereferencing it. In such languages, one
of the uses for pointers is to construct values of recursive type as linked structures.
In our pseudo-language, we use T* to indicate a pointer type to objects of type T

and therefore we declare a pointer as6 :

T * p ;

6 The mother tongue C programmer would write the example with a different distribution of spaces:
T *p, which is read as *p is a pointer to T. In C, * is a modiﬁer of the variable and not of the
type (which is apparent when you introduce two pointers in the same declaration: C requires int
*p, *q;, while we would write int* p,q; for uniformity with the other types). Although the
C approach seems simpler (particularly when considered with the dereferencing operator), it is
semantically more correct (and more uniform with respect to other languages) to see * as a type
modiﬁer and not a variable modiﬁer.

8.4 Composite Types

223

The values of type T* are pointers (from an implementation viewpoint: addresses)
to memory locations (that is modiﬁable variables) which contain values of type T. It
is not always the case such pointers can refer to arbitrary locations; some languages
require that pointers point only to objects allocated in the heap (this is the case with
Pascal, in its descendants and in some earlier versions of Ada). Other languages, on
the other hand, allow pointers also to point to locations on the system stack or into
the global area (this is the case with C++ and later versions of Ada).

There usually exists a canonical value, which is an element of type T*, for every
T, which indicates the null pointer, that is which points to no value. We write null
for this value. The operations permitted on values of pointer type are usually creation,
equality (in particular, equality to null), dereferencing (access to the object begin
pointed to).

The commonest way of creating a value of pointer type is to use a predeﬁned
construct or a library function which allocates an object of an appropriate type on
the heap and also returns a reference to the object. This is the purpose of malloc
in C:

int * p ;
p = ( int *) m a l l o c ( s i z e o f ( int ));

For heap management in the presence of explicit allocation, we refer to our discussion
in Sect. 5.4.

In some languages, it is possible also to create pointers by applying special oper-
ators which return the storage address of an object stored in memory. Again we use
C as the model for our examples. C uses the & operator to obtain the address of an
entity:

f l o a t r = 3 . 1 4 1 5 ;
f l o a t * q ;
q = & r ;

The pointer q now points to the location that contains the variable r. This is also an
example of a pointer pointing to a location on the stack and not in the heap.

Dereferencing a pointer is often indicated by some operator, for example, the *

in C. Continuing the example above:

* p = 33;
r = * q + 1;

Here, the ﬁrst line assigns the value 33 to the object pointed by p (which is in the
heap). The second line assigns to r the value 4.1415 (on the stack). It can be seen
that, as a side-effect, the second assignment also modiﬁes the value pointed by q (but
not q itself). It can also be observed that the l-value/r-value distinction for variables
in an assignment still remains valid even for a dereferenced pointer. When *p is on
the left of an assignment, it indicates the l-value that is obtained by dereferencing p
(that is, the assignment will work on the address contained in the pointer); when *p
is on the right of an assignment, it indicates the r-value of the same location.

From the pragmatic viewpoint, pointers play a key role in the deﬁnition of so-
called recursive structures such as lists, trees, etc. Some languages directly allow

224

8 Structuring Data

the deﬁnition of recursive types, as will be seen in Sect. 8.4.9. In languages with
pointers, recursive data structures can be deﬁned in a natural fashion. For example,
the type for the lists of integers7 can be deﬁned as:

type i n t _ l i s t = e l e m e n t *;
type e l e m e n t

= struct { int val ;

int_list next ;};

It can be seen that, in order for such a deﬁnition to be legal in a hypothetical
language, problems related to the use of a name before its deﬁnition (which we
mentioned in Sect. 4.3.3) must be solved.

Pointer Arithmetic

In C and in its descendants, in addition to the operations that we have just discussed,
it is possible to perform some arithmetic operations on pointers. It is possible to
increment a pointer, subtract one pointer from another (to get an offset constant),
add an arbitrary value to a pointer. This complex of operations goes under the name of
pointer arithmetic. The semantics of these operations, although denoted by the stan-
dard arithmetic operators, must be understood with reference to the pointer type on
which they operate. By means of an example, let us consider the following fragment:

int * p ;
int * c ;
p = ( int *) m a l l o c ( s i z e o f ( int ));
c = ( char *) m a l l o c ( s i z e o f ( char ));
p = p +1;
c = c +1;

If the two mallocs return addresses (i for p and j for c), at the end of
the fragment, the value of the two pointers is not i + 1 and j + 1, but, rather,
i+sizeof(int) and j + sizeof(char). And thus, analogously, for other
increment and decrement operations.

It should be clear that pointer arithmetic destroys every hope of type safety in a
language. There is no guarantee whatsoever that, at any time during the execution of
a program, a variable declared as a pointer to an object of type T will still point to
an area of store in which a value of type T is actually stored.

Deallocation

We have already seen that one of the most common methods for creating values of
a pointer type is to use a function deﬁned as standard in the language to allocate an
object on the heap and also return a pointer to it. The deallocation of memory can
be explicit or implicit.

7 As we saw in Sect. 4.3.3, a list is a variable-length data structure formed from a possibly empty
ordered sequence of elements of some type, in which it is possible to add or remove elements and
where only the ﬁrst element can be directly accessed.

8.4 Composite Types

225

In the case of implicit deallocation, the language does not provide the programmer
with mechanisms to reclaim memory. The programmer continues to request alloca-
tions while there is still available heap. When the heap memory is full, however, the
computation need not abort: already allocated values might not be accessible so they
can be reused. Consider indeed the following fragment:

int * p = ( int *) m a l l o c ( s i z e o f ( int ));
* p = 5;
p = null ;

The last command, which assigns null to p, destroys the only pointer through which
this previously allocated area can be accessed. It is possible to equip the abstract
machine with a mechanism to recoup such pieces of memory. This technique, which
is called garbage collection, is a subject that has been studied a great deal when
implementing programming languages. We will examine it in Sect. 8.12.

In the case of explicit deallocation, the language makes available a mechanism
with which the programmer can release the memory referred to by a pointer. In C,
for example, if p points to an object on the heap that was previously allocated by
malloc, calling the function free on p, will deallocate the object pointed to by
p (the store will be put back on the free list if the technique described in Sect. 5.4
is used). It is good practice to assign the value null to p when this is done. It is a
semantic error (with unpredictable result) to invoke free on a pointer which does
not refer to an object allocated using malloc (this can happen if either pointer
arithmetic has been used or if the pointer was created using the operator &).8 As we
saw in Chap. 4, the most important problem that is raised by deallocation is that it
is possible to generate dangling references; that is pointers with a value other than
null which point to storage that is no longer allocated. The simplest example is
probably the following:

int* p ;
int* q ;
p = (int *) malloc(sizeof(int));
* p = 5;
q = p ;
free ( p );
p = null ;
...
...
...
print (* p );
print (* q );

//
// s e r i e s of c o m m a n d s not m o d i f y i n g
//

p or q

// error that may be t r a p p e d
// error that c a n n o t be t r a p p e d

Figure 8.5 shows the situation in memory immediately after line 5 (left) and after
line 7 (right). The pointer q has a value that is not null. It points to an area of

8 The point is that malloc does not only allocate the space required for the object required, but also
a descriptor to the data. The descriptor contains the size of the allocated block and possibly other
information. It is by accessing such data that free (which takes a single pointer as parameter) can
determine what is to be deallocated.

226

8 Structuring Data

Fig. 8.5 Dangling references

memory that could by now be allocated to other data. We can certainly assume that
the abstract machine checks and signals an error if we try to de-reference a null
pointer (as on line 11).9 However, the de-referencing of q in line 12 cannot be
signalled and can be the cause of errors that are as devastating as they are difﬁcult
to ﬁnd.

In languages which allow pointers to refer to objects on the stack, dangling refer-
ences can also be generated without explicit deallocation. It is sufﬁcient to store the
address of a variable local to a function in a nonlocal environment.

{ int * p ;

void foo (){

int n ;
p = & n ;

}
...
foo ();
...

}

// here p is a d a n g l i n g r e f e r e n c e

If a language allows dangling references to happen, it is obvious that it cannot be
type safe. If a language does not allow pointers to data on the stack, dangling refer-
ences can be avoided by not having deallocation, both at the level of program design
(by using a language with implicit pointer deallocation and garbage collection), or
by deallocating nothing even if the programmer requests it: this is the case with
some early implementations of Pascal, where the deallocation function dispose
was implemented as a function with an empty body.

If, though, a language provides explicit deallocation, or pointers to the stack, some
techniques are discussed in Sect. 8.11 with which dangling pointers can be rendered
harmless, thereby restoring type safety.

8.4.7 Sequences

Some modern languages provide types for extensible sequences of values, akin
to arrays with dynamic shape that we brieﬂy discussed at the end of Sect. 8.4.4.
Sequences in Python (lists and tuples) or Ruby (arrays) are heterogenous, in the
sense that the elements of a sequence may be of different types. An element of a

9 This can happen often without affecting efﬁciency, by making use of mechanisms for protecting
addresses on the underlying physical machine.

8.4 Composite Types

227

Arrays and Pointers in C

In C, arrays and pointers are considered under certain circumstances to be equivalent. The declaration
of an array introduces a name which can be used as a pointer to the whole array. Conversely, if an
integer pointer refers to an array, it can also be used as the name of an array:

int V [ 1 0 ] ;
int* W ;
W = V ;
V [1] = 5;
W [1] = 5;
*( W +1) = 5;
*( V +1) = 5;

// W p o i n t s to the s t a r t of a r r a y V

The last four assignments in this example are all equivalent. They assign the value 5 to the sec-
ond element of the array pointed to by both V and W. (It can be seen how pointer arithmetic is natural
here.) In the case of a multidimensional array (stored in row-major order), pointer arithmetic allows
various combinations of operation. In the scope of the declaration int Z[10][10], the following
expressions are equivalent: Z[i][j], (*(Z+1))[j]), *(Z[i]+j), and *(*(Z+i)+j).

The equivalence of arrays and pointers is essential when passing parameters. It will be recalled
that C has only call by value. When it passes a vector, it always passes a pointer (by value), never
the array itself. The formal parameter can be declared as an array (int A[]) or as a pointer
(int *A). In the case of multidimensional arrays, it is required only to specify the number of
elements of the dimensions other than the ﬁrst in the formal parameter (for example A[][10], or
even (*A)[10]). This information is necessary for the static generation of the correct code for
accessing elements of the vector.

Finally, C permits storage of multidimensional array as a vector of pointers to arrays; for this

organisation by row-pointer, see Exercise 2.

sequence can be a sequence, too, thus allowing for nested structures. Sequences share
with arrays a fast access to an element by index, but they may allow also for deletion
and addition of elements,10 and, more generally, dynamic shrinking and growing of
the number of elements (the length of the sequence.) Moreover, ranges (Sect. 8.3.9)
may be used to dynamically select slices out of a sequence.

Flexibility of use is obviously payed for in terms of efﬁciency. Any element
of a sequence can be an arbitrary complex value, and the type of that value may
change dynamically. It follows from the discussion on dynamic shapes that sequences
cannot be directly allocated in an activation record and, moreover, values in a
sequences cannot be stored into contiguous memory. What is stored contiguously
is a vector of references (pointers) to the actual values, thus introducing several
layers of indirection—see Fig. 8.6 for a possible storage layout for the sequence
A=[[10,[2,3],’bob’],’foo’,1], where we write [1,’a’] for the two
elements sequence whose elements are 1 and ’a’. Deletion or addition of an ele-
ment at a given index (and, more generally, operations which change the length
of a sequence) cannot be implemented in constant-cost. To insert a new element
into an n elements sequence, all the n element references must be moved (copied),

10 Python’s list are mutable, while tuples are immutable.

228

8 Structuring Data

Fig. 8.6 Possible storage
arrangement for the sequence
A=[[10,[2,3],’bob’],
’foo’,1]

in order to restore the new sequence as a contiguous block of memory references.
To avoid repeated allocations (and thus repeated copies) the abstract machine may
over-allocate contiguous blocks for memory references, which may be used only
later during execution. With this technique, the cost of adding an element at the
end of a sequence (“appending an element”) may be reduced to constant cost under
amortized analysis. Adding or deleting elements at a generic index, though, remains
an operation whose cost is linear in the length of the sequence.

8.4.8 Recursive Types

A recursive type is a composite type in which a value of the type can contain a
(reference to a) value of the same type. In many languages recursive types can be
assimilated to (and in effect are) records in which a ﬁeld is of the same type as the
record itself. The simplest example is perhaps that of a list of integers, which we
present in our pseudo-language (adapting Java’s notation):

type i n t _ l i s t = { int val ;

i n t _ l i s t next ;};

To end the recursion, the language can provide a special value, for example null,
which belongs to any (recursive) type and which we can imagine as having the empty
value. A value of type int_list is therefore a pair: the ﬁrst element is an integer,
the second is a value of type int_list, and so on, until one of these int_list
values is null (see the example in Fig. 8.7).

Figure 8.8 shows the deﬁnition of a recursive type for binary trees of characters.

It also shows a value and the usual graphical representation for trees.

As can be seen from these very simple examples, the possibility of deﬁning recur-
sive types makes the type system of a language ﬂexible and powerful (see Exercise 4).
The operations permitted on the values of recursive types are the selection of a com-
ponent and equality test for null.

If the language admits modiﬁable objects (which is the case for all imperative
languages), it is also possible to construct circular values. In purely functional lan-
guages, the values of a recursive type are always in the form a tree.

Recursive types are usually represented as structures in the heap. A value of a
recursive type corresponds to a linked structure. Every element of the structure is

Fig. 8.7 A value of type int_list

8.4 Composite Types

229

Fig. 8.8 Binary tree over char

composed of a record in which the recursive reference is implemented as an address
to the next record (the one created in the previous recursive step). The representation
in the heap of a binary tree shown in Fig. 8.8 corresponds exactly to its graphical
representation.

The creation of values of a recursive type (so that they can be associated with
a name) is an operation which varies considerably from language to language. In
many functional languages, the values of a recursive type are expressible. There
exist explicit syntactic constructs for designating their values. An example could
be the expression in Fig. 8.7 or in Fig. 8.8 (see, also, the box an ML). In imperative
languages, on the other hand, the values of recursive types are constructed by explicit
allocation of their components in the heap. To continue our analogy with Java, we
have a predeﬁned constructor, new, which allows us to allocate instance of the type
in the heap:

i n t _ l i s t l = new i n t _ l i s t ();

The part on the right of the assignment symbol creates on the heap a record of the
form speciﬁed by int_list and assigns the name l to a reference to this record.
At this point, its ﬁelds can be initialised. For example:

l . val = 2;
l . next = null ;

It remains to discuss the management of the heap when there are values of recursive
type. They are in fact dynamically allocated (explicitly as in Java, or implicitly as in
ML) but languages which admit recursive types as primitive do not in general permit
explicit deallocation of the values thus created. As in the case of implicit allocation

230

8 Structuring Data

Recursive Types in ML

ML is an important functional language. It is equipped with an extended type system. It is a type-
safe language with many interesting properties. The language allows the deﬁnition of explicitly
recursive types using constructors, which are introduced as part of the deﬁnition of the type. By
way of an example, our deﬁnition of list of integers can be written as (ignoring the fact that ML has
lists as a predeﬁned type):

d a t a t y p e i n t _ l i s t = Null | CONS of int * i n t _ l i s t ;

In this deﬁnition, Null and CONS are constructors, that is function symbols to which there corre-
sponds no code, but which serve only to construct, syntactically, terms of the desired type (in this
case int_list). The vertical line is read as “or”. A value of type int_list is the constant Null,
or is a pair (denoted by the constructor CONS) composed of an int and an int_list. Therefore
CONS(2,Null) is a simple value of type int_list. Figure 8.9 shows the ML expression which
corresponds to the value in Fig. 8.7.

The language permits the deﬁnition of ill-founded recursive types. For example the following
deﬁnition introduces the type empty; it is so-called because it is impossible to construct values of
this type:

d a t a t y p e empty =

Void of e m p t y ;

Indeed, there is no basic constructor which will allow us to construct a value of type empty without
presupposing another such value.

Fig. 8.9 A value of type int_list in ML

that we discussed in the context of pointers, it is necessary to provide the abstract
machine with mechanisms for garbage collection in order to reclaim the chunks of
memory that can no longer be accessed.

8.4.9 Functions

Every high-level programming language supports the deﬁnition of functions (or
procedures). Few traditional languages permit the denotation of function types (that
is, give them a name in the language). Let f be a function deﬁned as:

T f ( S s ) { . . . }

It has the type S -> T; more generally, a function with header

T f ( S1 s1 , ... , Sn sn ) { . . . } .
is of type S1 × · · · × Sn->T.

The values of a functional type are denotable in every language but not always
they are expressible (or storable). In addition to deﬁnition, the principal operation
permitted on a value of functional type is application, that is the invocation of a
function on some arguments (actual parameters).

8.5 Equivalence

231

Relations of Preorder and Equivalence

A binary relation, ∗, on a set, D, is a subset of the cartesian product of D with itself: ∗ ⊆ D × D.
We write c ∗ d for (c, d) ∈ ∗. A relation is reﬂexive when, for every d ∈ D, it is true that d ∗ d. It
is symmetric if, for all c, d ∈ D, if c ∗ d holds, then also d ∗ c holds. It is transitive if, for every
c, d, e ∈ D, if c ∗ d and d ∗ e, then c ∗ e. It is antisymmetric if, for every c, d ∈ D, if c ∗ d and
d ∗ c, then c coincides with d.

If a relation is reﬂexive and transitive, it is said to be a preorder. If a preorder is also symmetric,

it is an equivalence. If, on the other hand, a preorder is also antisymmetric, it is a partial order.

In most modern languages the type of functions has the same status of any other
type: we may have expressions having as value a function (Sect. 7.2.3), it is possible to
pass functions as arguments to other functions (Sect. 7.2.1), and to deﬁne functions
which return functions as results (Sect. 7.2.2). In such higher order languages, a
function is not just a piece of code equipped with its local environment, but may be
handled like other data. We will see in Chap. 11, the outline of a possible abstract
machine for doing this.

8.5 Equivalence

Having analysed the principal types that we ﬁnd in programming languages, the time
has come to discuss the rules which govern the correctness of programs with respect
to types. The ﬁrst set of these rules deals with the deﬁnition of when two types,
which are formally different, are to be considered interchangeable. The rules deﬁne
an equivalence relation between types. If two types are equivalent, every expression
or value of one type is also an expression or value of the other, and vice versa. In the
next section, we will discuss compatibility rules which specify when a value of one
type can be used in a context in which the value of another type would be expected
(but not conversely).

Let us recall that a type is deﬁned in the following form (the details will vary from

language to language):

type n e w t y p e = expression;

Languages interpret a deﬁnition like this in two different ways which lead to two

distinct rules for type equivalence:

• The deﬁnition of a type of can be opaque, in which case we have equivalence by

name.

• The deﬁnition of the type can be transparent, in which case we have structural

equivalence.

232

8 Structuring Data

8.5.1 Equivalence by Name

If a language uses opaque type deﬁnitions, each new deﬁnition introduces a new type
which is different from every preceding one. In this case, then, we have equivalence
by name, as deﬁned below.

Deﬁnition 8.2 (Equivalence by name) Two types are equivalent by name only if
they have the same name (so a type is equivalent only to itself).

By way of example, let us consider the following deﬁnitions of types:

type T1 = 1 . . 1 0 ;
type T2 = 1 . . 1 0 ;
type T3 = int ;
type T4 = int ;

Four distinct types are introduced. There is no equivalence between them.

However, equivalence by name is too restrictive. Some languages adopt the rule of
weak (or lax) equivalence by name. The simple renaming of a type does not generate
a new type but only an alias for the same one. In the example above, using a weak
equivalence by name, the types T3 and T4 are equivalent, but types T1 and T2
remain distinct.

Under equivalence by name, each type has a unique deﬁnition which occurs at
a unique point in the program, a fact which simpliﬁes maintenance. Despite its
simplicity, from the programming point of view, equivalence by name is the choice
that most respects the intentions of the designer. If the programmer has introduced
two different names for the same type, they will have their reasons which the language
respects by maintaining two different types.

Note that equivalence by name is deﬁned with reference to a speciﬁc, ﬁxed pro-
gram and it does not make sense to ask whether two types are equivalent by name
“in general”.

8.5.2 Structural Equivalence

A type deﬁnition is transparent when the name of the type is just an abbreviation for
the expression deﬁning the type. In a language with transparent declarations, two
types are equivalent if they have the same structure, that is if, substituting names for
the relevant deﬁnitions, identical types are obtained. If a language uses transparent
type deﬁnitions, the equivalence between types that is obtained is said to be structural
equivalence.

We can give a more precise recursive deﬁnition of structural equivalence.

Deﬁnition 8.3 (Structural Equivalence) Structural equivalence of types is the (least)
equivalence relation satisfying the following properties:

8.5 Equivalence

233

• The name of a type is equivalent to itself;
• If a type T is introduced with the deﬁnition type T = expression, T is

equivalent to expression;

• If two types are constructed by applying the same type constructor to equivalent

types, then the two types are equivalent.

By way of example, consider the following deﬁnitions:

type T1 = int;
type T2 = char ;
type T3 = struct{

T1 a ;
T2 b ;

}

type T4 = struct{

int a ;
char b ;

}

T3 and T4 are structurally equivalent. Some aspects of the deﬁnition of equivalence
that we have given are deliberately vague or imprecise. For example, it is not clear
whether the three following types are equivalent:

type S = struct{

int a ;
int b ;

}

type T = struct{

int n ;
int m ;

}

type U = struct{

int m ;
int n ;

}

They result from the application of the same constructors, but they have been given
names (or ﬁeld order) that are different. A further subtle question concerns structural
equivalence and recursive types:

type R1 = struct{

int a ;
p ;
R2

}

type R2 = struct{

int a ;
p ;
R1

}

Intuitively, we can think that R1 and R2 equivalent, but the type checker will
be unable to solve the mutual recursion involved in these deﬁnitions (showing the

234

8 Structuring Data

equivalence between R1 and R2 requires a mathematical argument of some sophis-
tication).

Structural equivalence allows us to speak about equivalent types in general, not
just those in a speciﬁc program. In particular, two equivalent types can always be
substituted for each other in any context without altering the meaning of the program
in which the substitution occurs (this general property of substitution is often known
as referential transparency).

It will come as no surprise to the reader to learn that existing languages almost
always use some form of combination or variant of the two equivalence rules that
we have just deﬁned. Java uses equivalence by name, except for arrays, for which
it uses structural equivalence; C uses structural equivalence for arrays and for types
deﬁned using typedef, but not when it involves records (structs) and unions, for
which it always uses equivalence by name; C++ uses equivalence by name (except
when it inherits from C); ML uses structural equivalence, except for types deﬁned
using datatype; Modula-2 inherits from Pascal its use of equivalence by name,
but Modula-3 uses structural equivalence; and so on.

8.6 Compatibility and Conversion

The relationship of compatibility between types, which is weaker than equivalence,
allows a value of one type to be used in a context where another type has been
requested.

Deﬁnition 8.4 (Compatibility) We say that type T is compatible with type S, if a
value of type T is permitted in any context in which a value of type S would be
admissible.

In many languages, it is the rule of compatibility (and not that of equivalence)
which controls the correctness of assignment (the type of the right-hand component
must be compatible with that of the left-hand one), parameter passing (the type of
the actual parameter must be compatible with that of the formal parameter), etc. It is
clear that two equivalent types are also compatible with each other but in general the
relation of compatibility is not symmetric: the canonical example is the compatibility
that exists in many languages (but not in all: ML and Java, for example, do not admit it)
between int and float (but not vice versa). The compatibility relation is therefore
a pre-order (that is a reﬂexive and transitive relation) that is not symmetric, but almost
never an ordering (that is it is not symmetric, but not anti-symmetric either). In fact,
in a language which admits structural equivalence, two types that are structurally
equivalent are compatible but not equal.

The compatibility relation, more than that of equivalence, varies enormously
between languages. Without pretending to be complete, let us list some of the possi-
ble concepts that we can encounter in order of generality (that is, of the “generosity”
of the compatibility relation). A type T can be compatible with S when:

8.6 Compatibility and Conversion

235

1. Types T and S are equivalent; it is the most restrictive version of compatibility.
2. The values of T form a subset of the values of S: this is a case of an interval
type, contained in its own base type (and therefore compatible with it). Usually,
the values of T and values of S have the same internal representation.

3. All the operations on the values of S are also permitted on values of T. This
is probably the most interesting case of compatibility and can be declined in
several different variants.
A ﬁrst variant is structural compatibility11 and is present in statically typed
languages. We present it by means of a simple example on record types. Let us
assume that we have declared two record types:

type S = struct{

int a ;

}

type T = struct{

int a ;
char b ;

}

The only possible operation on values of type S is the selection of the ﬁeld with
name a. This also makes sense for values of type T (on which also the selection
of the ﬁeld b makes sense). There is no inclusion relation between values of T
and those of S; still it makes perfect sense to use a value of type T whenever a
value of type S is required. Therefore, something like

int f ( x : S ){

r e t u r n x . a
}

p r i n t ( f ({ a =10 , b = 2 0 } ) )

is correct under structural compatibility and prints 10. Scala allows structural
compatibility and the following is correct code:

i m p o r t r e f l e c t . S e l e c t a b l e . r e f l e c t i v e S e l e c t a b l e
def f ( x :{ def a : Int }): Int = {

x . a

}
f ( new { def a = 20;

def b = 1 0 0 } )

// e v a l u a t e s to 20: s c a l a . Int

A second variant on this form of compatibility is called duck typing12 and is
present in some dynamically typed languages, for instance Python. When a value
is used in a certain context, the value’s type itself is not important. What it matters
is that the value supports all operations that are used on it. We may recast the
previous example in Python as follows:

11 Structural compatibility is sometimes called static duck typing, to distinguish it from the similar
mechanism in dynamically typed languages, which we will introduce next.
12 From the old saying: “If it walks like a duck, swims like a duck, and quacks like a duck, then it
probably is a duck”.

236

8 Structuring Data

def f ( x ):

r e t u r n x . a

c l a s s T :
a =20
b =100

f ( T ()) # e v a l u a t e s to 20

In duck typing there is no formal reference to the actual types of the involved
values. There is only a (dynamic) check that all operations are deﬁned on certain
values.
A ﬁnal variant is when compatibility is expressed as a subtype relation: T is
a subtype of S and hence we may use any T value whenever an S value is
required. We will discuss the case of subtyping in Sects. 8.7.3 and 10.2.4 (for
object-oriented languages). Sometimes structural compatibility and subtypes
can both be present and combined. In the context of subtyping, this form of
compatibility takes the name of Liskov substitution principle.13 It is a form of
behavioural subtyping: if T is a subtype of S, then we may use an object of type
T wherever one of type S is present in a program, without altering the properties
of that program.

4. The values of T correspond in a canonical fashion to values of S. In addition
to the case outlined in the previous point, this is the case that we have already
mentioned of int being compatible with float. (This is not an instance of
point (2), above, because, as far as the implementation is concerned, the values
of the two types are distinct).

5. Values of T can be made to correspond with some values of S. Once the require-
ment of the canonicality of correspondence has been dropped, every type can be
made to be compatible with another deﬁning a (conventional) way to transform
one value of T into one of S. Using this very broad notion of compatibility,
float can be made compatible with int by arbitrarily deﬁning the conversion
procedure (for example, rounding, truncation, etc.).

In order to manage this collection of different interpretations as a uniﬁed whole,
we introduce the notion of type conversion. This notion will be stated in two distinct
ways:

• Implicit conversion (also called coercion or forced conversion). This is the case in
which the abstract machine inserts a conversion when there is no such indication
in the high-level language;

• Explicit conversion (or cast). This is when the conversion is indicated in the text

of the program.

13 From Barbara Liskov, the recipient of the Turing Award in 2008.

8.6 Compatibility and Conversion

237

Casts that Do not Change the Representation

In some situations, especially in systems programming, it could be useful to change the type of
an object without changing its representation in memory. This kind of conversion is obviously
forbidden in type-safe languages, but is, though, permitted in many languages (these are often said
to be “unchecked” (ADA) or “non-converting” type casts).

An example in C using the addressing (&) and de-reference (*) operators is:

int a = 233;
f l o a t b = *(( f l o a t *) & a );

First of all, the address of the integer variable a is taken, then it is converted explicitly into a pointer
to a float using the cast (float *); ﬁnally, it is dereferenced and assigned to the real value b.
All this machinery is merely annotation for the compiler which does not result in any conversion
by the machine. After the assignments we have two locations containing identical bit strings, one
interpreted in twos complement (and representing the integer 233), one interpreted as the IEEE 754
representation for a ﬂoating point number (provided that integer and float are represented by the
same number of bytes).

It is clear that a conversion which does not modify the stored representation is always an

extremely delicate operation, as well as being a potential source of hard-to-ﬁx errors.

Coercions

In the presence of compatibility between the types T and S, the language allows a
value of type T to occur where a value of type S is expected. When this happens, the
compiler and/or abstract machines inserts a type conversion between T and S. We
will call this a type coercion.

From a syntactic viewpoint, coercion has no signiﬁcance other than annotating a
compatibility. From the implementation viewpoint, however, a coercion can corre-
spond to different things depending upon the notion of compatibility adopted:

1. Type T is compatible with S and have the same storage representation (at least
for values of T). In such a case, coercion remains a syntactic matter and causes
no code to be generated.

2. Type T is compatible with S but there exists a canonical way to transform values
of T into values of S. In this case, the coercion is executed by the abstract
machine, which applies precisely the canonical conversion. For example, in the
case of int and float, the abstract machine inserts code to transform (at
runtime) the representation of an integer (e.g., in two’s complement) into one
for a ﬂoating point (e.g., in IEEE 754).

3. The compatibility of T with S is based on an arbitrary correspondence between
values of T with those of S. In this case, too, the abstract machine inserts code that
performs the transformation. This is the case, also, of all those situations where
T and S have the same representation, but T is a superset of S. For example, T
is int and S is an integer interval14 (note that we are in the symmetric case
to the “canonic” case, considered in point 1, in which T ⊆ S). Coercion in this

14 Almost all languages with interval types allow this kind of compatibility for the obvious reason
of programming ﬂexibility.

238

8 Structuring Data

case does not transform the representation but dynamically checks (at least if
the language is supposed to be type safe) that the value of T belong to S.

Languages with strong type checking tend to have few coercions (that is few com-
patibilities) of the last kind. On the other hand, in a language like C, the type system
is designed to be by-passed and so permits numerous coercions (from characters to
integers, from long reals to short, from long integers to short reals, and so on).

Explicit Conversions

Explicit conversions (or casts, using the name by which they are known in C and in
other languages) are annotations in the language which specify that a value of one
type must be converted to that of another type. In this case, as well, such a conversion
can be either just a syntactic marking or can correspond to code that is executed by
the abstract machine, using the scheme for coercions that we have already discussed.
In our pseudo-language, we will follow the conventions of the C language family
and will denote a cast using brackets:

S s = ( S ) t ;

Here we are assigning a value t, having converted it into type S, to a variable of
type S. Not every explicit conversion is permitted, only those for which the language
knows how to implement the conversion. It is clear that we can insert a cast where a
compatibility exists. In this case explicit conversion is syntactically useless but must
be advised for documentation purposes. Languages with few compatibilities make
available, in general, many explicit conversions, which the programmer can use to
annotate the program where a change of type is necessary.

Generally, modern languages tend to prefer casts over coercions. They are more
useful as far as documentation is concerned; they do not depend upon the syntac-
tic context in which they appear, and, most importantly, they behave better in the
presence of overloading and polymorphism (which we will consider shortly).

8.7 Polymorphism

A type system in which any language object (value, function, etc.) has a unique type
is said to be monomorphic.15 Here we will be interested in the more general concept
given in the next deﬁnition.

Deﬁnition 8.5 A type system in which the same object can have more than one type
is said to be polymorphic.16 By analogy, we will say that the object is polymorphic
when the type system assigns more than one type to it.

15 This is a word derived from the Greek and means “has only a single (mono) form (morphos)”
16 “Which has many (poly) forms.”

8.7 Polymorphism

239

Even the more conventional languages contain limited forms of polymorphism.
The name + in many languages is of type int×int→int, as well as of type
float×float→float. The value null has the type T* for every type T. The
function length (which returns the number of elements of an array) is of type
T[]→int for every type T. The list could be continued. In conventional languages,
however, it is not in general permitted for the user to deﬁne polymorphic objects.
Let us take as an example, a language with a type system that is fairly inﬂexible (for
example, Pascal or Java but to some extent C also) and let us assume that we want
to write a function that sorts a vector of integers. The resulting function could have
the signature:

void int_sort( int A [])

If we now need to sort a vector of characters, we need to deﬁne another function

void c h a r _ s o r t ( char C [])

which is wholly identical to the previous example except in the type annotations.
A polymorphic language would allow the deﬁnition of a single function

void sort ( < T > A [])

where <T> denotes a generic type which will be speciﬁed at a later stage.

In this section, we will analyse the phenomenon of polymorphism. We will start

by distinguishing three different forms:

• Ad hoc polymorphism, also called overloading.
• Universal polymorphism, which can be further divided into:

– Parametric polymorphism, and
– Subtyping or inclusion polymorphism.

8.7.1 Overloading

Overloading, as its other name (ad hoc polymorphism) suggests, is really polymor-
phism in appearance only. A name is overloaded when it corresponds to more than
one object and context information must be used to determine which object is denoted
by a speciﬁc instance of that name. The most common examples of this are:

• The use of the name + to indicate either integer or real addition (and sometimes it

also denotes concatenation of character sequences).

• The ability to deﬁne more than one function (or constructor) with the same name

but whose instances differ in the number or type of their parameters.

In the case of overloading, therefore, a single name corresponds to more than
one object (in fact, to a ﬁnite number of objects). If it is the name of a function,
it will be associated with different pieces of code. The ambiguity of the situation
is solved statically using type information that is present in the context. From the

240

8 Structuring Data

Polymorphic Types and Universal Quantiﬁcation

Rather than writing a polymorphic type between angle brackets, a more uniform notation (one
which is more suggestive, as well as mathematically more accurate) is that which uses universal
quantiﬁcation. Instead of <T> -> void, we write ∀T.T[]->void.

This is a notation that is well-suited to the description of all the variations on polymorphism
which have been proposed; in Sect. 8.7.3 (and again in Sect. 10.4.1) it will be used to analyse subtype
polymorphism.

conceptual viewpoint, we can imagine a kind of pre-analysis of the program which
solves cases of overloading by substituting a unambiguous name which uniquely
denotes a unique object for each symbol that is overloaded. Overloading is therefore
a sort of abbreviation at the syntactic level. It vanishes as soon as we introduce
additional information.

Overloading should not be confused with coercion. They are two different mecha-
nisms which solve different problems. On the other hand, in the presence of coercions,
it might be not at all clear how a case of overloading should be solved. Consider for
example the following expressions:

1 + 2
1.0 + 2.0
1 + 2.0
1.0 + 2

This quartet of expressions can be interpreted in several ways. First, + is overloaded
with four different meanings. Second, + is overloaded with two meanings (integer
and real) and coercion is inserted in the ﬁnal two cases. Next, + merely denotes real
addition and in the other three cases, coercions are employed. It is up to the deﬁnition
of the language to determine which of these interpretations is correct.

8.7.2 Universal Parametric Polymorphism

We begin with a deﬁnition that is relatively imprecise but adequate for our needs.

Deﬁnition 8.6 A value exhibits universal parametric polymorphism (or parametric
polymorphism, more brieﬂy) when it has is an inﬁnite number of different types
which can be obtained by instantiating a single schema of general type.

A universal polymorphic function is therefore composed of a single piece of code
which operates uniformly on all the instances of its general type (because information
about the type is not exploited by the algorithm which the function implements).

Among the examples that we discussed at the start of the section, there are some
that fall into this category: the value null, which belongs to every type T* (that is
to every type that can be obtained by substituting an actual type for T); the function
void sort(<T> A[]), which sorts an array of any type whatsoever.

8.7 Polymorphism

241

Before presenting more examples, we need to extend the notation. Following on
from what was suggested in Sect. 8.4.9, we can write the polymorphic type of sort
as <T>[] →void. In this notation, we use angle brackets to indicate that <T>
is not a usual type but a sort of parameter. By substituting any “concrete” type for
the parameter, we obtain a speciﬁc type for sort. Each way to substitute a type
for <T> corresponds to one of the inﬁnite number of ways to apply the function:
int[] -> void, char[]-> void, etc. With this notation, the type of null
should be more correctly given as <T>*.

Let us give another example. A function which exchanges two variables of any
type. As with sort, if it is written in a language without polymorphism, we would
need a swap function for every possible variable type. Using universal polymor-
phism, and assuming that we have at our disposition call by reference, we can write:

void swap ( r e f e r e n c e <T > x , r e f e r e n c e <T > y ){

<T > tmp = x ;
x = y ;
y = tmp ;
}

A polymorphic object can be instantiated to a speciﬁc type. The instantiation can
happen in many different ways, according to the speciﬁc mechanism(s) for polymor-
phism provided by the language. The simplest model is that in which instantiation
occurs automatically and is performed by the compiler or the abstract machine:

int * k = null ;
char v , w ;
int i , j ;
...
swap (v , w );
swap (i , j );

1

3

5

Without requiring additional annotations, on line 1, using information from the
context (the assignment is performed on the variable of type int*), the type checker
instantiates the type of null as int*. On line 5, swap is instantiated to character
and, on line 6, to integer.

Parametric polymorphism is general and ﬂexible. It is present in programming
languages in two notationally different forms called explicit and implicit parametric
polymorphism.

Explicit Polymorphism

Explicit polymorphism is the kind we have discussed thus far. In the program, there
are explicit annotations (our <T>) which indicate the types to be considered param-
eters. This is the kind of polymorphism present in C++ (using the concept of “tem-
plate”) and in Java (from version J2SE 5.0 using the “generic” notion).

Implicit Polymorphism

Other languages (in particular functional languages like ML) adopt implicit paramet-
ric polymorphism, in which the programmer need not provide any type indications

242

8 Structuring Data

and instead the type checker (or rather, more properly, the module performing type
inference—see Sect. 8.9) tries to determine for each object the most general type
from which the other types can be obtained by instantiation. The simplest example
of a polymorphic function is that of the identity which, using a notation as close as
possible to that which we have used this far, can be written as:

fun Ide ( x ){return x ;}

We will use the word fun to indicate that we are deﬁning a function. The rest
is totally analogous to the deﬁnitions we have already seen, except that there are
no type annotations, either for parameters or results. Type inference will assign to
the function Ide, the type <T>-><T>. If the actual parameter is of type X, the
result will be of type X, for any type X. The application of a polymorphic function
obviously takes place without type indication. Ide(3) will be correctly typed as a
value of type int, while Ide(true) be typed as bool.

Let us consider here a ﬁnal example of implicit parametric polymorphism com-

bined with higher order:

fun Comp (f ,g , x ){return f ( g ( x ));}

Comp applies the composition of its ﬁrst two parameters (the functions) to the argu-
ment x. What is the type that can be inferred for Comp? Here is the most general
possible:

( <S > - > <T >) × ( <R > - > <S >) × <R > -> <T >

The inferred type is perhaps more general than the reader would have thought.

8.7.3 Subtype Universal Polymorphism

Subtype polymorphism is typically present in object-oriented languages. It is a more
limited form of universal polymorphism than parametric polymorphism.

Indeed, here as well, a single object can be assigned an inﬁnite number of different
types. They are obtained by instantiating a single most general type. In this case, too,
since it is a case of true polymorphism (i.e., universally quantiﬁed polymorphism),
there is (at least conceptually) a single algorithm which is uniform in the type—that is,
it does not depend upon the particular structure of the type—that can be instantiated
to each of the inﬁnite number of possible types.

However, in the case of subtype polymorphism, not all of the possible instantia-
tions of the schema for the most general type are admissible. Instantiations are limited
by a notion of structural compatibility between types, that is, using the concept of
subtype.

To be more precise, let us assume that a subtype relation is deﬁned over the
language’s types. We denote this relation by the symbol <:. Therefore, we read
C <: D as “C is a subtype of D”. For the time being, we can be content with an
abstract concept, but in Sect. 10.2.4, we will ﬂesh out this concept in terms of relations
between classes in object-oriented languages.

8.7 Polymorphism

Templates in C++

243

Parametric polymorphism is obtained in C++ by means of templates. These are program schemata
which include parameters (of class or of type). The function swap could take the following form:

template < t y p e n a m e T >
void swap ( T & x , T & y ){

T tmp = x ;
x = y ;
y = tmp ;

}

The operator, &, attached to the type of a formal parameter indicates that the parameter is
passed by reference, a primitive parameter-passing mode in C++ (in which it differs from C). The
instantiation of a template is automatic. The call swap(x,y) is instantiated to the common type
of x and y.

Deﬁnition 8.7 A value exhibits subtype (or bounded) polymorphism when there is
an inﬁnity of different types which can be obtained by instantiating a general type
scheme, substituting for a parameter the subtypes of an assigned type.

To express subtype polymorphism, it is useful to make use of the notation with
universal quantiﬁers that we introduced in the box on Sect. 8.7.1. A polymorphic
function of type

∀T <: D . T - > void

can be applied to all the values of any subtype of D. Polymorphism therefore is not
general but is limited to subtypes of D.

8.7.4 Remarks on the Implementation

In this book, we cannot possibly explain the implementation of universal polymor-
phism in detail. We will limit ourselves to two paradigmatic examples of the problems
which can be encountered.

The ﬁrst way of handling polymorphism is that of solving it statically at link
time17 (this is the case with C++). When a polymorphic function is called in two
different instances, its code is instantiated in two different ways, one for each of the
different instances required. Taking again the concrete example of swap, there is a
local variable, tmp, which must be allocated in the activation record when swap is
called. But the space to allocate for tmp depends on its type which is not known when

17 Some authors hold that in cases of this kind, we should talk of generics rather than polymorphism.
We think, on the contrary, that the phenomenon of polymorphism is a syntactic phenomenon of a
language, that can be obtained through several different implementation approaches.

244

8 Structuring Data

Implicit Polymorphism in ML

The majority of compilers for ML are interactive. The user enters one expression (or deﬁnition)
at a time. First of all, the system veriﬁes the correctness of the typing of the input expression and
then derives the most general type for it. If the types are correct, the expression is evaluated and the
result is displayed (in the case of a deﬁnition, its evaluation will extend the environment with the
new association). We can deﬁne the identity function as:

- fun Ide ( x ) = x ;
val Ide = fn : ’ a -> ’a

In this example, the ﬁrst line is what is entered by the user (“-” is the prompt), while the
following line is the system’s reply. The name Ide is added to the environment and associated with
a functional value of type ’a -> ’a. The identiﬁers preﬁxed by ‘’’ are type variables in ML,
that is they can be instantiated. We can request the evaluation of Ide as follows:

- Ide (4);
val it = 4 : int
- Ide ( true );
val it = true : bool

Now the functions:

- fun Comp (f ,g , x ) = f ( g ( x ));
val Comp = fn : ( ’a - > ’ b )*( ’ c - > ’ a )* ’ c -> ’b
- fun swap (x , y ) = let tmp = ! x in

val swap = fn : ( ’ a ref )*( ’ a ref ) -> unit

( x :=! y ; y = tmp ;);

In the case of swap, type inference ﬁnds that the two arguments cannot be generic values
but variables (or references) of any type whatsoever (’a ref). The exclamation mark, “!”, is
the explicit dereferencing operator. The identiﬁer, unit, is the singleton type that is used for
expressions with side effects.

- val v = ref 0;
val v = ref 0 : int ref
- val w = ref 2;
val w = ref 0 : int ref
- swap (v , w );
val it = () : unit
- ! w ;
val it = 0 : int

In the example, v and w are initialised, respectively, to a reference to 0 and 2. Type inference
correctly deduces that they must be variables of type int. After the swap, the dereferencing of w
obviously yields 0.

the template for swap is originally compiled. At link time, though, polymorphic
functions can be identiﬁed and their code is modiﬁed (instantiated) so as to take
into account the actual type(s) with which they are called. The resulting code can
then be linked. It can be seen that there can be many copies of the same template
(one per instantiation) in the executable code. On the other hand, the execution of a

8.8 Type Checking and Inference

245

template-using program is as efﬁcient as a program that does not use them, because
that templates no longer exist at runtime.

In the case of other polymorphic languages (and ML is one of them), a single
version of the code for a polymorphic function is maintained. It is this single piece
of code that is executed when one of its instances is required. What is done about
the type-dependent information (in the case of swap, this is the amount of store to
allocate for tmp)? It is necessary to change the whole data representation. Instead
of directly allocating the data in the activation record, a pointer is maintained that
points to the actual data. The data also includes its own descriptors (representing
dimensions, structure, etc.). In the case of swap, when it is necessary to store a
value in tmp, a pointer to the variable x is accessed and its size (as recorded in the
descriptor) is accessed. At this point, the memory necessary for tmp is allocated
in the heap and a pointer to it is stored in the activation record. The ﬂexibility,
uniformity and the conciseness of the code (there are no repeated instances of the
same function) are paid for by decreased efﬁciency—an indirect reference is always
required to access a piece of data. We will see more implementation details for
subtype polymorphism in Sect. 10.4 when considering object-oriented languages.

8.8 Type Checking and Inference

We have already seen how a language’s type checker is responsible for verifying that
a program respects the rules (in particular, the compatibility rules) imposed by the
type system. In the case of a language with static checking, the type checker is one of
the compiler’s modules; when type checking is dynamic, the type checker is a module
in the runtime system. To perform its task, the type checker must determine the type
of the expressions occurring in the program (for example, it must determine whether
the type of the expression on the right-hand side of an assignment is compatible
with the variable on the left-hand side). To do this, it uses the type information that
the programmer has explicitly placed at critical points in the program (for example,
declarations of local names, parameter declarations, explicit conversions, etc.), as
well as information that is implicit in the program text (for example, the types of
predeﬁned constants, those of numerical constants and so on).

To determine the type of complex expressions, the type checker performs a simple
traversal of the program’s abstract syntax tree (see the start of Sect. 6.1.3). Starting at
the leaves (which represent variables and constants whose types are known), it moves
upwards through the tree towards the root, computing the type of the composite
expressions on the basis of the information provided by the programmer and the
information it obtains from the type system (for example, the type system could
establish that + is an operator which, when applied to two expressions of type int,
permits an expression also of type int to be derived, while =, when applied to two
arguments of scalar type, gives an expression of type bool). In many cases, the
information provided by the programmer can turn out to be redundant, for example:

int f (int n ){return n +1;}

246

8 Structuring Data

Starting with the fact that n is of type int, it can be easily inferred that the value
returned by the function must be of type int. The explicit speciﬁcation given by the
programmer of the result type is a redundant speciﬁcation that the language requires
as a last resort so that it can report possible logical errors.

Instead of the simple type checking method we have merely outlined, some lan-
guages use a more sophisticated procedure which we might call type inference. The
progenitor of this family of languages is ML (we have cited this language a number
of times above), whose type system is sophisticated and reﬁned. Some ideas pre-
sented in work on ML have inspired the design of many different languages, even
those of a non-functional kind. In order to introduce the concept of inference in a
simpliﬁed form, we will again use the deﬁnition of function f. It is clear that also
the speciﬁcation that the formal parameter, n, must be an int is redundant. This is
because the constant 1 is an integer and + takes two integers and returns an integer,
so n must be an integer. From a declaration of the form:

fun f ( n ){return n +1;}

it is certainly possible automatically to derive that f has type int -> int. Type
inference is exactly this process of the attribution of a type to an expression in
which explicit type declarations of its components do not occur. To perform this
derivation, the algorithm also works on a syntax tree, again starting at the leaves
but, this time, it must take into account the fact that it might not be immediately
possible to determine a speciﬁc type for any atomic expression (n, in this case). In
a case like this, the inference algorithm assigns a type variable such as ’a (using
ML notation). Climbing the tree again and using information present in the context,
some constraints for type-variables will be collected. In our case, from the type of 1
and from that of + (which comes from looking up the table of predeﬁned symbols),
the constraint ’a = int is derived.

This form of inference is more general and powerful than the simple type checking
algorithm used in languages like Pascal, C or Java. It is capable of determining the
most general type of a function, that is it can account for all the polymorphism
implicit in an expression. This is done as follows:

1. Assign a type to each node in the syntax tree. For predeﬁned names and constants,
use the type stored in the symbol table. For new (i.e., programmer-deﬁned) iden-
tiﬁers, and for every composite expression (which are stored as the internal nodes
of the tree), use a type variable (one new variable for every expression or name);
2. Rewalk the syntax tree, generating an (equality) constraint between types at every
internal node. For example, if we apply the function symbol, f, to which we have
previously assigned the type ’a to the argument v of type ’b, the constraint
’a = ’b -> ’c will be generated to indicate that f must really be a function
and that its argument must be of the same type as v (’c is a new type variable).
3. Resolve the constraints thus gathered using the uniﬁcation algorithm (a powerful,
but conceptually simple, instrument for symbolic manipulation which we will
discuss in the context of logic languages, in Sect. 12.3).

8.9 Safety: An Assessment

247

There are cases in which solving constraint equations does not remove all vari-

ables. If we apply the inference algorithm to

fun g ( n ){return n ;}

we will obtain, as type, ’a -> ’a. We already know that this is not an error but
a positive characteristic: an expression whose most general type contains a type
variable is a polymorphic expression.

8.9 Safety: An Assessment

We started our analysis of types in programming languages with the idea of safety
based on types. This same notion has guided us in our examination of the various
characteristics of type systems. The time has arrived to take into account what we
have understood, classifying programming languages according to their safeness.
Let us, then, distinguish between:

1. Non safe languages;
2. Locally safe languages;
3. Safe languages.

In the category of unsafe languages, we ﬁnd all of those languages whose type
system is a more or less just a methodological suggestion to the programmer, in
the sense that the language allows the programmer to bypass type checking. Every
language that allows access to the representation of a data type belongs to this cat-
egory, as does every language that allows access to the value of a pointer (pointer
arithmetic, that is). C, C++ and all the languages of their family are unsafe.

Locally unsafe languages are those languages whose type system is well regulated
and type checked but which contain some, limited, constructs which, when used,
allow insecure programs to be written. The languages Algol, Pascal, Ada and many
of their descendants belong to this category, provided that the abstract machine really
checks types that need dynamic checking, such as checking the limits of interval types
(which, it should be recalled, can be used as an index type for arrays). The unsafe
part results from the presence of unions (uncontrolled variants) and from the explicit
deallocation of memory. Of these two constructs, it is the second that has the greater
impact in practice (it is much more common to encounter programs which deallocate
memory than those which make signiﬁcant use of variant records), but it is the former
that is the more dangerous. As we will see in the next section, it is possible to equip
the abstract machine with appropriate mechanisms to allow it to detect and prevent
dangling pointers, even if, for reasons of efﬁciency, they are almost never used. We
have already seen different examples of type-system violations which are possible
when using variant records. We have postponed until last the nastiest possibility:

248

8 Structuring Data

that variant records can be used to access and manipulate the value of a pointer. In
Pascal, we can write18 :

var v : r e c o r d

case bool of

true
: ( i : i n t e g e r );
f a l s e : ( p :ˆ i n t e g e r )

end

Here, ˆinteger is the Pascal notation for the type of pointers to integers. It is now
possible to assign a pointer to the variant p, manipulate it as an integer using the
variant i and then use it again as a pointer.

Finally, we have safe languages for which a theorem guarantees that the execution
of a typed program can never generate a hidden error “induced by the violation
of a type.” In this category are languages with dynamic type checking like Lisp
and Scheme, languages with static checking such as ML, and languages with static
checking but with many checks also performed at runtime (as in Java). Type safety—
at it should be clear after the several examples of this chapter—is obtained as a delicate
balance between the statics and the dynamics of a programming language.

8.10 Avoiding Dangling References

In this section, we will tackle the question of which mechanisms can be included in
an abstract machine that will dynamically prevent dereference of dangling pointers.
This is a problem we ﬁrst discussed in Sect. 8.4.6. We will ﬁrst present a radical
solution which works in the general case of pointers into the heap or into the stack.
We will then consider a somewhat less demanding mechanism that, however, works
only for pointers into the heap (and then under some probabilistic assumptions).

8.10.1 Tombstone

Using tombstones, an abstract machine can detect every attempt at dereferencing a
dangling reference. Every time an object is allocated in the heap (to be then accessed
by pointer), the abstract machine also allocates an extra word in memory. This word
is called the tombstone. In a similar fashion, a tombstone is allocated every time that
a stack-referencing pointer is allocated (that is, to a certain approximation, every
time that the “indirection-to” operator (&) is used). The tombstone is initialised
with the address of the allocated object and the pointer receives the address of the
tombstone. When a pointer is dereferenced, the abstract machine inserts a second
level of indirection, so that it ﬁrst accesses the tombstone and then uses what it ﬁnds

18 In Pascal, pointers are allocated only on the heap by an allocation request (the new function).They
can be assigned but there is no primitive method to access the value of a pointer.

8.10 Avoiding Dangling References

249

Fig. 8.10 Tombstones

there to access the object that is pointed to. When one pointer is assigned to another,
it is the contents of the pointer (and not the tombstone) that is modiﬁed. Figure 8.10
shows this operation graphically.

On deallocation of an object, or when an indirection on the stack becomes invalid
because it is part of an activation record that has been popped,19 the associated
tombstone becomes invalidated, and a special value is stored in it to signal that the
data to which the pointer refers is dead (this is where the name of this technique
derives from). An appropriate choice of such a value must be made so that every
attempt to access the contents of an invalid tombstone is captured by the address-
protection mechanism of the underlying physical machine.

Tombstones are allocated in a particular area of memory in the abstract machine
(this, appropriately enough, is called the cemetery). The cemetery can be managed
more efﬁciently than the heap because all tombstones are of the same size.

For all its simplicity, the tombstone mechanism imposes a heavy cost in terms both
of time and space. As far as time is concerned, we must consider the time required
for the creation of tombstones, that for their checking (which can be reduced, as we
have seen, if an underlying hardware protection mechanism can be used) and, most
importantly, the cost of two levels of indirection. Tombstones are also expensive in
terms of storage. They require a word of memory for every object allocated on the
heap; a word is also required every time a pointer into the stack is created. If there are

19 The operation can be quite opaque. Consider the case of a variable passed by reference to a
function. Inside the function, a pointer is created to point to the variable. The pointer will be created
using an associated tombstone. The tombstone must be invalidated when the lifetime of the variable
forming the actual parameter ends, not when the function terminates.

250

8 Structuring Data

lots of allocations of small objects, the percentage of memory required by tombstones
can be signiﬁcant. Moreover, invalid tombstones always remain allocated, with the
consequence that they might exhaust the space available in the cemetery, even though
there may be plenty of space available on the heap. To prevent this last problem, it is
possible to reuse those tombstones that are no longer in use (that is, those to which
no pointer points) using a small reference-counting garbage collector (Sect. 8.11.1);
this further increases the time cost of the mechanism.

8.10.2 Locks and Keys

An alternative to the tombstone technique is called locks and keys. This solves the
problem of dangling references into a heap using a mechanism which does not suffer
from the accumulated problems of tombstones.

Every time an object is created on the heap, the object is associated with a lock
which is a word of memory in which an arbitrary value is stored. (Strictly speaking,
it should be a value that can be sequentially incremented every time an object is
allocated, but which avoids values such as 0 and 1, the code of frequently used
characters, and so on.) In this approach, a pointer is composed of a pair: the address
proper and a key (a word of memory that will be initialised with the value of the
lock corresponding to the object being pointed to). When one pointer is assigned
to another, the whole pair is assigned. Every time the pointer is dereferenced, the
abstract machine checks that the key opens the lock. In other words, it veriﬁes that the
information contained in the key coincides with that in the lock. In the case in which
the values are not the same, an error is signalled. When an object is deallocated, its
lock is invalidated and some canonical value (for example, zero) is stored, so that
all the keys which previously opened it now cause an error (see Fig. 8.11). Clearly,
it can happen that the area of memory previously used as a key is reallocated (for
another lock or for some other structure). It is statistically highly unlikely that an
error will be signalled as a result of randomly ﬁnding an ex-lock that has the same
value as it had before it was cleared.

Locks and keys also have a non-negligible cost. In terms of space, they cost even
more than tombstones because it is necessary to associate an additional word with
each pointer. On the other hand, locks as well as keys are deallocated at the same time
as the object or the pointer of which they are a part. From an efﬁciency viewpoint, it
is necessary to take into account both the cost of creation, and, more importantly, the
high cost of pointer assignment and of determining whether the key opens a lock,
something that happens every time a pointer is dereferenced.

8.11 Garbage Collection

251

Fig. 8.11 Locks and keys

8.11 Garbage Collection

In languages without explicit memory deallocation, it is necessary to equip the
abstract machine with a mechanism which could automatically reclaim the mem-
ory allocated on the heap that is no longer used. This is done by a garbage collector,
introduced for the ﬁrst time in Lisp around 1960, and since then included in many
languages. Java has a powerful and efﬁcient garbage collector.

From the logical point of view, the operation of a garbage collector consists of

two phases:

1. Distinguish those objects that are still alive from those no longer in use (garbage

detection);

2. Collect those objects known no longer to be in use, so that the program can reuse

their space.

In practice these two phases are not always temporally separate, and the technique
for reclaiming objects essentially depends on the one in which the objects no longer
in use are discovered. We will see, then, that the “no longer in use” concept in a

252

8 Structuring Data

garbage collector is often a conservative approximation. For reasons of efﬁciency,20
not all the objects that can be used again are, in reality, determined by the garbage
collector to be so.

The educational aim of this text does not permit us to describe a garbage collector
for a real language, or to provide an exhaustive overview of the different techniques
available (there are bibliographic references to exhaustive treatments). We will limit
ourselves to presenting in some detail the main points in the light of the most common
techniques. Real garbage collectors are variations on these techniques. In particu-
lar the collectors that are of greatest interest today are based upon some form of
incremental reclamation of memory and are beyond the scope of this book.

We can classify classical garbage collectors according to how they determine
whether an object is no longer in use. We will have, therefore, collectors based on
reference counting, as well as marking and copying. In the next few sections, we
will present these collectors. We will discuss these techniques in terms of pointers
and objects but the argument can equally be applied to languages without pointers
which use the reference variable model.

Finally, we will see that all the techniques that we consider need to be able to
recognize those ﬁelds inside an object that correspond to pointers. If objects are cre-
ated as instances of statically-deﬁned types (so it is statically known where pointers
are inside instances), the compiler can generate a descriptor containing offsets to the
pointers in each type. Each object in the heap is associated with the type of which
it is an instance (for example, via a pointer to its type descriptor). When an object
is to be deallocated, the garbage collector accesses the type descriptor to access the
pointers inside the object. Similar techniques are used to recognise which words in
an activation record are pointers. If types are only known dynamically, descriptors
have to be completely dynamic and allocated together with the object.

8.11.1 Reference Counting

A simple way to tell whether an object is not in use is to determine whether there
are any pointers to it. This is the reference counting technique. It deﬁnes what is
probably the easiest way of implementing a garbage collector.

When an object is created on the heap, an integer is allocated at the same time.
This integer is the reference counter or reference count for the object. The reference
count is inaccessible to the programmer. For each object, the abstract machine must
ensure that the counter contains the number of pointers to this object that are still
active.

In order to do this, when an object is created (that is, a pointer for it is assigned
for the ﬁrst time), its counter is initialised to 1. When we have a pointer assignment:

p = q ;

20 As well as decidability.

8.11 Garbage Collection

253

Fig. 8.12 Reference counting

the counter belonging the object pointed to by q is incremented by one, while the
counter of object pointed to by p is decremented by one. When a local environment is
exited, the counters of all the objects pointed to by pointers local to the environment
are decremented. Figure 8.12 shows operation of this technique in diagrammatic
form.

When a counter returns to the value 0, its associated object can be deallocated
and returned to the free list. This object, moreover, might contain internal pointers,
so before returning the memory occupied by an object to the free list, the abstract
machine follows the pointers inside the object and decrements by one the counters
of the objects they point to, recursively collecting all the objects whose counter has
reached 0.

From the viewpoint of the abstract division into two phases of a garbage collector,
the update and checking of counters implement the garbage-detection phase. The
collection phase occurs when the counter reaches zero.

A clear advantage of this technique is that it is incremental because checking
and collection are interleaved with the normal operation of the program. With a few
adjustments, real-time systems (that is systems where there are absolute deadlines
to response time) can employ this technique.

The biggest defect, at least in principle, of this technique is in its inability to
deallocate circular structures. Figure 8.13 shows a case in which a circular structure
has no more access paths. However it cannot be collected because, clearly, its counters
are not zero. It can be seen that the problem does not reside so much in the algorithm,
as in the deﬁnition of what a useless object is. It is clear that all objects in a circular
structure missing an external reference are not usable any more, but this is not at all
captured by the deﬁnition of not being pointed at.

It could be argued that reference counting, despite its simplicity, is also fairly
inefﬁcient. Its cost is proportional to the combined work performed by the program

254

8 Structuring Data

Fig. 8.13 Circular structures with reference counts

(and not to the size of the heap or to the percentage of it in use or not in use at any
time). One particular case is that of updating the counters of parameters of pointer
type which are passed to functions that execute only for a short time. These counters
are allocated and, after a particularly short time, have their value returned to zero.

Of the major programming languages using automatic memory management,
Python, in its reference implementation CPython, is the one with a basic garbage
collector based on reference counting. It cannot be disabled and it is always at work.
An additional, incremental collector (which, instead, may be disabled by the user)
is available for reclaiming unusable circular structures.

8.11.2 Mark and Sweep

The mark and sweep method takes its name from the way in which the two abstract
phases we mentioned at the start are implemented:

• Mark. To recognize that something is unused, all the objects in the heap are tra-
versed, marking each of them as “not in use”. Then, starting from the pointers which
are active and present on the stack (the root set), all the data structures present in
the heap are traversed recursively (the search is usually performed depth-ﬁrst) and
every object that is encountered is marked as “in use”.

• Sweep. The heap is swept—all blocks marked “in use” are left alone, while those

marked “not in use” are returned to the free list.

It can be seen that to implement both phases, it is necessary to be able to recognize
allocated blocks in the heap. Descriptors might be necessary to give the size (and
organisation) of every allocated block.

8.11 Garbage Collection

255

Unlike the reference-counting garbage collector, a mark and sweep collector is
not incremental. It it will be invoked only when the free memory available in the
heap is close to being exhausted. The user of the program can therefore experience
a signiﬁcant degradation in response time while waiting for the garbage collector to
ﬁnish.

The mark and sweep technique suffers from three main defects. In the ﬁrst place,
and this is also true for reference counting, it is asymptotically the cause of external
fragmentation (see Sect. 5.4.2): live and no longer live objects are arbitrarily mixed
in the heap which can make allocating a large object difﬁcult, even if many small
blocks are available. The second problem is efﬁciency. It requires time proportional
to the total length of the heap, independent of the percentages of used and free space.
The third problem relates to locality of reference. Objects that are “in use” remain
in their place, but it is possible that objects contiguous with them will be collected
and new objects allocated in their place. During execution, we ﬁnd that objects with
very different ages appear next to each other. This, in general, drastically reduces
locality of reference, with the usual degradation in performance observed in systems
with memory hierarchies.

8.11.3 Interlude: Pointer Reversal

Without some precautions, every marking technique runs the risk of being completely
unusable in a garbage collector. The collector, indeed, goes into action when the
memory is near to being exhausted, while the marking phase consists of the recursive
traversal of a graph, which requires the use of a stack to store the return pointers.21
It is necessary, when marking a graph under these circumstances, to use carefully
the unused space present in pointers, using a technique called pointer reversal.

As shown in Fig. 8.14, when visiting a chained structure, it is necessary to mark a
node and recursively visit the substructures whose pointers are part of that node. In
this recursive scheme, it is necessary to store the addresses of blocks when they are
visited in a stack, so that they can be revisited when the end of the structure is reached.
In the ﬁgure, using depth-ﬁrst search, node E has been reached (marked blocks are
indicated with a tick). The stack contains nodes A, B and C. After visiting E, it takes
C from the stack and follows any pointers leading from this node; since there are
none, it takes B from the stack and follows the remaining pointer, pushing B onto the
stack, and visiting D. Using pointer reversal, this stack is stored in the pointers that
form the structure, as shown in Fig. 8.15. When the end of a substructure is reached,
(and a pop of the stack is required), the pointer is returned to its original value, so
that at the end of the visit, the structure is exactly the same as it was at the start (apart
from marking, clearly). In the ﬁgure, we are visiting node E. It can be seen how the

21 In many abstract machines, stack and heap are implemented in a single area of memory, with
stack and heap growing in opposite directions starting from the two ends. In such a case, when there
is no space in the heap, there is no space for the stack.

256

8 Structuring Data

Fig. 8.14 A stack is necessary for depth-ﬁrst traversal

Fig. 8.15 Pointer reversal

stack in Fig. 8.14 is stored in space internal to the structure itself (pointers marked
with a grey background). Only two pointers (p_prec and p_curr) are required
to perform the visit. After visiting E, using p_prec, the structure is retraversed in
a single step. Using the reversed pointer, we return to B, resetting the correct value
of the pointer in C using p_curr.

8.11.4 Mark and Compact

To avoid the fragmentation caused by the mark and sweep technique, we can modify
the sweep phase and convert it into a compaction phase. Live objects are moved
so that they are contiguous and thereby leave a contiguous block of free memory.
Compaction can be performed by moving linearly across the heap, moving every live
block encountered and making it contiguous with the previous block. At the end, all
free blocks are contiguous, as are all unused blocks.

8.11 Garbage Collection

257

This is a technique which, like mark and sweep, requires more than one pass
over the heap (and the time required is therefore proportional to the heap size).
Compaction, on its own, requires two or three passes. The ﬁrst is to compute the new
position to be taken by the live blocks; a second updates the internal pointers and a
third actually moves objects. It is, therefore, a technique that is substantially more
expensive than mark and sweep if there are many objects to be moved.

On the other hand, compaction has optimal effect on fragmentation and on locality.
It supports treating the free list as a single block. New objects are allocated from the
free list by a simple pointer subtraction.

8.11.5 Copy

In garbage collectors based on copy there is no phase during which the “garbage”
is marked. There is just the copying and compaction of live blocks. The lack of an
explicit mark phase and the completely different way space is handled make its costs
substantially different from those of algorithms based on marking.

In the simplest copy-base garbage collector (called a stop and copy collector),
the heap is divided into two equally-sized parts (two semi-spaces). During normal
execution, only one of the two semi-spaces is in use. Memory is allocated at one
end of the semi-space, while free memory consists of a unique contiguous block
which reduces its size every time there is an allocation (see Fig. 8.16). Allocation is
extremely efﬁcient and there is no fragmentation.

When the memory in the semi-space is exhausted, the garbage collector is invoked.
Starting with pointers in the stack (the root set), it begins visiting the chain of struc-
tures held in the current semi-space (the fromspace), copying the structures one by
one into the other semi-space (the tospace), compacting them at one end of the latter

Fig. 8.16 Stop and copy before a call to the garbage collector

258

8 Structuring Data

Fig. 8.17 Stop and copy after the execution of the garbage collector

(see Fig. 8.17). At the end of this process, the role of the two semi-spaces is swapped
and execution returns to the user program.

The visit and copy of the live part can be executed in an efﬁcient manner using the
simple technique known as Cheney’s algorithm (Fig. 8.18). Initially, all the objects
which are immediately reachable from the root set are copied. This ﬁrst set of objects
is copied in a contiguous fashion into the tospace; it is handled as if it were a queue.
Consider now the ﬁrst of these objects, and add to the end of the queue (that is, copy
into the tospace) the objects pointed to by the pointers present in the ﬁrst object,
while, at the same time, these pointers are modiﬁed. In this way, we have copied
into the tospace all the ﬁrst object’s children. We keep processing the queue until it
remains empty. At this point, in the tospace we have a copy of the live objects in the
fromspace.22

A stop and copy garbage collector can be made arbitrarily efﬁcient, provided that
there is enough memory for the two semi-spaces. In fact, the time required for a
stop and copy is proportional to the number of live objects present in the heap. It is
not unreasonable to assume that this quantity will be approximately constant at any
moment during the execution of the program. If we increase the memory for the two
semi-spaces, we will decrease the frequency with which the collector is called and,
therefore, the total cost of garbage collection.

22 Some precautions must be taken to prevent objects accessible via multiple pointers being copied
more than once.

8.11 Garbage Collection

259

Fig. 8.18 Cheney’s algorithm

260

8.12 Summary

8 Structuring Data

This chapter has dealt with a crucial aspect in the deﬁnition of programming lan-
guages: the organisation of data in abstract structures called data types. The main
points can be summarised as follows.

• Deﬁnition of type as a set of values and operations and the role of types in design,

implementation and execution of programs.

• Type systems as the set of constructs and mechanisms that regulate and deﬁne the

use of types in a programming language.

• The distinction between dynamic and static type checking.
• The concept of type-safe systems, that is safe with respect to types.
• The primary scalar types, some of which are discrete types.
• The primary composite types, among which we have discussed records, variant
records and unions, arrays and pointers in detail. For each of these types, we have
also presented the primary storage techniques.

• The concept of type equivalence, distinguishing between equivalence by name and

structural equivalence.

• The concept of compatibility and the related concepts of coercion and conversion.
• The concept of overloading, when a single name denotes more than one object

and static disambiguation.

• The concept of universal polymorphism, when a single name denotes an object
that belongs to many different types, ﬁnally distinguishing between parametric
and subtype polymorphism.

• Type inference, that is mechanisms that allow the type of a complex expression to

be determined from the types of its elementary types.

• Techniques for runtime checking for dangling references: tombstones and locks

and keys.

• Techniques for garbage collection, that is the automatic recovery of memory,
brieﬂy presenting collectors based on reference counters, mark and sweep, mark
and compact and copy.

Types are the core of a programming language. Many languages have similar
constructs for sequence control but are differentiated by their type systems. It is not
possible to understand the essential aspects of other programming paradigms, such
as object orientation, without a deep understanding of the questions addressed in this
chapter.

8.13 Bibliographical Notes

Types are a central notion in programming language design. Classic references are [2]
and the more recent [3]. Review articles that introduce the mathematical formalisms
are [4,5]. A larger treatment of the same arguments is to be found in [1]. On the

8.14 Exercises

261

structural (behavioral) notion of compatibility, see [6] that introduces what we now
call the Liskov substitution principle. On overloading and polymorphism in type
systems, a good, clear review is [7] (which we have largely followed in this chapter).
Tombstones originally appeared in [8] (also see [9]). Fisher and Leblanc [10]
proposed locks and keys, as well as techniques so that an abstract Pascal machine
can make variant records secure.

The ofﬁcial deﬁnition of Algol 68 (which is quite a read) is [11]. A more acces-
sible introduction can be found in [12]. The deﬁnition of ML can be found in [13],
while an introductory treatment of type inference is to be found in [14].

There is a large literature on garbage-collection techniques. A detailed description
of a mark and sweep algorithm can be found in several books on algorithms, for exam-
ple [15], while [16] is a good summary of classical techniques. For a book entirely
devoted to the problem, with pseudocode and a more-or-less complete bibliography
(up to the time of publication), see [17].

8.14 Exercises

1. Consider the declaration of the multi-dimensional array:

int A [ 1 0 ] [ 1 0 ] [ 1 0 ]

We know that an integer can be stored in 4 bytes. The array is stored in row
order, with increasing memory addresses (that is, if an element is at address i, its
successor is at i + 4, and so on). The element A[0][0][0] is stored at address
0. State the address at which element A[2][2][5] is stored.

2. Instead of the contiguous multidimensional array allocation that we discussed
in Sect. 8.4.4, some languages allow (e.g., C), or adopt (Java), a different organ-
isation, called row-pointer. Let us deal with the case of a 2-dimensional array.
Instead of storing rows one after the other, every row is stored separately in
some region of memory (for example on the heap). Corresponding to the name
of the vector, a vector of pointers is allocated. Each of the pointers points to a
proper row of the array. (i) Give the formula for accessing an arbitrary element
A[i][j] of an array allocated using this scheme. (ii) Generalise this memory
technique to arrays of more than 2 dimensions. (iii) Discuss the advantages and
disadvantages of this organisation in the general case. (iv) Discuss the advan-
tages and disadvantages of this technique for the storage of 2-dimensional arrays
of characters (that is, arrays of strings).

3. Consider the following (Pascal) declarations:

type s t r i n g = p a c k e d a r r a y [ 1 . . 1 6 ] of char ;
type s t r i n g _ p o i n t e r =
type p e r s o n = r e c o r d

ˆ s t r i n g ;

name : string ;
case s t u d e n t : B o o l e a n of

true :
false : ( s o c i a l s e c n o : s t r i n g _ p o i n t e r )

( year : i n t e g e r );

end ;

262

8 Structuring Data

and assume that the variable C contains a pointer to the string “LANGUAGES”.
Describe the memory representation for the person record after each of the
following operations:

var p i p p o : p e r s o n ;
p i p p o . s t u d e n t := true ;
pippo . year := 2 2 3 3 4 4 ;
p i p p o . s t u d e n t := true ;
p i p p o . s o c i a l s e c n o := C ;

4. Show that the integer type can be deﬁned as a recursive type starting with just
the value null. Then write a function that checks if two integers deﬁned in this
way are equal.

5. Given the following type deﬁnitions in a programming language which uses

structural type equivalence:

type T1 = struct{

int a ;
bool b ;

};

type T2 = struct{

int a ;
bool b ;

}

type T3 = struct{

T2 u ;
T1 v ;

}

type T4 = struct{

T1 u ;
T2 v ;

}

In the scope of the declarations T3 a and T4 b, it is claimed that the assignment
a = b is permitted. Justify your answer.

6. Which type is assigned to each of the following functions using polymorphic

type inference?

fun G ( f , x ){return f ( f ( x ));}
fun H ( t , x , y ){if ( t ( x )) return x ;
else return y ;}

fun K ( x , y ){return x ;}

7. Using tombstones, it is necessary to invalidate a tombstone when its object is no
longer meaningful. The matter is clear if the object is on the heap and is explicitly
deallocated. It is less clear when the tombstone is associated with an address on
the stack. In this case, indeed, it is necessary for the abstract machine to be able
to determine all the tombstones that are potentially associated with an activation
record. Design a possible organisation which makes this operation reasonably
efﬁcient (recall that tombstones are not allocated in activation records but in the
cemetery).

8.14 Exercises

263

8. Consider the following fragment in a pseudo-language with reference-based
variables and which uses locks and keys (C is a class whose structure is of no
importance):

C foo = new C ();
C bar = new C ();
C fie = foo ;
bar = fie ;

// o b j e c t OG1
// o b j e c t OG2

Give possible values after the execution of the fragment for all the keys and all
the locks involved.

9. Under the same assumptions as in Exercise 8, consider the following code frag-
ment in which free(p) denotes the explicit deallocation of the object referred
to by the pointer p:

class C { int n ; C next ;}
C foo = new C ();
C bar = new C ();
foo . next = bar ;
bar . next = foo ;
free ( bar );

// o b j e c t OG1
// o b j e c t OG2

For all the pointers in the fragment, give possible key values. For each object
in the fragment, give possible lock values. In both cases, the values should be
those after execution of the fragment terminates. After execution of the fragment,
also execute the code foo.n = 1; foo.next = 0;. State what a possible
result of this execution might be.

10. Consider the following fragment which is written in a pseudo-language with a
reference-model for variables and a reference-counting garbage collector. If OGG
is an arbitrary object in the heap, indicate by OGG.cont its (hidden) contents:

class C { int n ; C next ;}
C foo (){

C p = new C ();
p . next = new C ();
C q = new C ();
q . next = p . next ;
return p . next ;
}

C r = foo ();

// o b j e c t O G G 1
// o b j e c t O G G 2
// o b j e c t O G G 3

State what are the values of the reference counters for the three objects after
execution of line 6 and then of line 9.

11. Under the same assumptions as in Exercise 10, state what the values of the
reference counters are for the two objects after the execution of the following
fragment. Which of the two can be returned to the free list?

C foo = new C ();
C bar = new C ();
C fie = foo ;
bar = fie ;

// o b j e c t OG1
// o b j e c t OG2

264

8 Structuring Data

12. Under the same assumptions as in Exercise 10, state what the reference-counter
values for the three objects after execution of the following fragment are. Which
of them can be returned to the free list?

class C { int n ; C next ;}
C foo = new C ();
bar = new C ();
foo . next = bar ;
bar = new C ();
foo = bar ;

// o b j e c t OG1
// o b j e c t OG2

// o b j e c t OG3

13. Using your favourite programming language, deﬁne the data structures required
to represent a binary tree. Then write detailed code that performs a preorder
traversal of a tree without using the system stack and instead using the pointer-
reversal technique.

References

1. B. Pierce, Types and Programming Languages (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2002)
2. D.A. Schmidt, The Structure of Typed Programming Languages (MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.,

1994)

3. R. Harper, Practical Foundations for Programming Languages, 2nd edn. (Cambridge Univer-

sity Press, Cambridge, 2016)

4. L. Cardelli, Type systems, in The Computer Science and Engineering Handbook. ed. by A.B.

Tucker (CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1997)

5. J.C. Mitchell, Type systems for programming languages, in Handbook of theoretical computer
science (vol. B): formal models and semantics, ed. by J. van Leeuwen. (MIT Press and Elsevier
Science Publishers, Cambridge-Amsterdam, 1990), pp. 365–458

6. B.H. Liskov, J.M. Wing, A behavioral notion of subtyping. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst.

16(6), 1811–1841 (1994). (Nov)

7. L. Cardelli, P. Wegner, On understanding types, data abstraction, and polymorphism. ACM

Comput. Surv. 17(4), 471–522 (1985)

8. D.B. Lomet, Scheme for invalidating references to freed storage. IBM J. Res. Develop. 19(1),

26–35 (1975)

9. D.B. Lomet, Making pointers safe in system programming languages. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng.

11(1), 87–96 (1985)

10. C.N. Fisher, R.J. LeBlanc, The implementation of run-time diagnostics in Pascal. IEEE Trans.

Software Eng. 6(4), 313–319 (1980)

11. A. van Wijngaarden, B.J. Mailloux, J.E.L. Peck, C.H.A. Koster, M. Sintzoff, C.H. Lindsey,
L.G.L.T. Meertens, R.G. Fisker, Revised report on the algorithmic language ALGOL 68. Acta
Inf. 5, 1–236 (1975)

12. F. Pagan. A Practical Guide to Algol 68, Wiley Series in Computing. (Wiley, London, 1976)
13. R. Milner, M. Tofte, R. Harper, D. MacQueen, The Deﬁnition of Standard ML - Revised (MIT

Press, Cambridge, MA, 1997)

14. L. Cardelli, Basic polymorphic typechecking. Sci. Comput. Progr. 8(2), 147–172 (1987)
15. E. Horowitz, S. Sahni. Fundamentals of Data Structures in Pascal (Freeman and Company,

New York, 1994)

References

265

16. P.R. Wilson, Uniprocessor garbage collection techniques, in Proceedings of the International

Workshop on Memory Management, LNCS 637 (Springer, Berlin, 1992)

17. R. Jones, R. Lins, Garbage Collection: Algorithms for Automatic Dynamic Memory Manage-

ment (Wiley, Hoboken, 1996)
