# Fuente
- archivo: 295-350.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/(Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science) Maurizio Gabbrielli_ Simone Martini - Programming Languages_ Principles and Paradigms (2nd Edition)-Springer (2023)/295-350.pdf
- extraido: 2026-04-27T21:01:38

# Contenido

Object-Oriented Paradigm

10

In this chapter, we discuss object-oriented languages, a paradigm which has its roots
in Simula (during the 60s) and Smalltalk (in the 70s). It achieved enormous success,
including commercial success, in the two following decades (C++, Java, Python are
only some of the many object-oriented languages that are in use today). “Object-
oriented” is by now an abused slogan, which can be found applied to languages, to
databases, operating systems, and so on. Here, we attempt to present the linguistic
aspects which concern objects and their use, making the occasional reference to
object-oriented design techniques (but we can only refer the reader to the (extended)
literature for details).

Even after restricting the subject, there are many ways to proceed to the concepts
that interest us. We will follow the approach we believe the simplest: we will present
objects as a way to gain data abstraction in a way that is ﬂexible and extensible.
We will begin our study, then, by showing some limits to the techniques that we
introduced in Chap. 9. These limits will suggest to us some concepts, which, in fact,
form the basics of an object-oriented language. Having examined these characteristic
aspects in detail, we will study some extensions to linguistic solutions that are avail-
able in commercial languages, referring, in particular, to the concepts of subtype,
polymorphism and genericity.

Following the style that we have maintained thus far in this text, we will seek
to remain independent of any speciﬁc programming language, even if this will not
always be possible. The language that will mostly inspire us will be Java, for its
coherence of design, which will allow us to discuss some concepts (and not lin-
guistic details) in a clearer way, allowing us to summarise also the properties of
other languages. However, Java puts the emphasis more on the notion of class (see
Sect. 10.2.2), than in that of object—other languages are more object centered (even
when classes are present). As a paradigmatic example of this second kind of object-
oriented languages we will take Python.

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
M. Gabbrielli and S. Martini, Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms,
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34144-1_10

279

280

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

10.1 The Limits of Abstract Data Types

Abstract data types are a mechanism that guarantees the encapsulation and hiding
of information in a clean and efﬁcient manner. In particular, they have the excellent
characteristic of uniting in a single construct both data and the methods for legally
manipulating it. This is a very important methodological principle, which is obtained
at the cost of a certain rigidity of use, which shows up when we want to extend or
reuse an abstraction. We will discuss these problems using a simple and certainly
not realistic example, but one which exposes the most important questions.

So that we do not overload the notation with the call-by-reference, it is convenient
to use a language that uses a reference model for variables (see Sect. 6.2.1). The
following ADT implements a simple counter:

a b s t y p e C o u n t e r {

type C o u n t e r = int ;
s i g n a t u r e

void r e s e t ( C o u n t e r x );
int get ( C o u n t e r x );
void inc ( C o u n t e r x );

o p e r a t i o n s

void r e s e t ( C o u n t e r x ){

x = 0;

}
int get ( C o u n t e r c ){

r e t u r n x ;

}
void inc ( C o u n t e r c ){

x = x +1;

}

}

The concrete representation of the Counter type is the integer type. The only
operations possible are zeroing of a counter, reading and incrementing its value.

We want now to deﬁne a counter that is enriched by some new operations. For
example, we want to take into account the number of calls the reset operation has
had in a given counter. We may choose among two different approaches: the ﬁrst is
that of deﬁning a completely new ADT which is similar to the one just deﬁned with
the addition of new operations, as in:

a b s t y p e N e w C o u n t e r 1 {

type N e w C o u n t e r 1 = s t r u c t {

int c ;
int n u m _ r e s e t = 0;

}

s i g n a t u r e

void r e s e t ( N e w C o u n t e r 1 x );
int get ( N e w C o u n t e r 1 x );
void inc ( N e w C o u n t e r 1 x );
int h o w m a n y _ r e s e t s ( N e w C o u n t e r 1 x );

o p e r a t i o n s

10.1 The Limits of Abstract Data Types

281

void r e s e t ( N e w C o u n t e r 1 x ){

x . c = 0;
x . n u m _ r e s e t = x . n u m _ r e s e t +1;

}
int get ( N e w C o u n t e r 1 x ){

r e t u r n x . c ;

}
void inc ( N e w C o u n t e r 1 x ){

x . c = x . c +1;

}
int h o w m a n y _ r e s e t s ( N e w C o u n t e r 1 x ){

r e t u r n x . n u m _ r e s e t ;

}

}

This is a solution that is acceptable as far as encapsulation goes, but we were required
to redeﬁne the operations what we have already deﬁned for a simple counter (they
are operations with the same name but with different argument types; names are
therefore overloaded which the compiler has to differentiate using the context). In
this toy example, we have only a few lines of code but the negative effect on a real
situation can be quite signiﬁcant.1 More important again is what happens when, for
whatever reason, it is desired to change the implementation of a simple counter. Since
there is no relationship between Counter and NewCounter, any modiﬁcation to
Counter does not have any effect on a NewCounter. If the modiﬁcation was the
correction of a bug, or a new, more efﬁcient way of performing an operation, such a
modiﬁcation must be performed by hand on the deﬁnition of a NewCounter, with
all the known problems that this brings (ﬁnd all the places where a variant of the old
operation is used, do not introduce any syntactic errors, etc.).

A second possibility is one that makes use of Counter to deﬁne an enriched

counter:

a b s t y p e N e w C o u n t e r 2 {

type N e w C o u n t e r 2 = s t r u c t {

C o u n t e r c ;
int n u m _ r e s e t = 0;

}

s i g n a t u r e

void r e s e t ( N e w C o u n t e r 2 x );
int get ( N e w C o u n t e r 2 x );
void inc ( N e w C o u n t e r 2 x );
int h o w m a n y _ r e s e t s ( N e w C o u n t e r 2 x );

o p e r a t i o n s

void r e s e t ( N e w C o u n t e r 2 x ){

r e s e t ( x . c );
x . n u m _ r e s e t = x . n u m _ r e s e t +1;

}

1 This is a negative effect not only on the writing of the program, but also in the size of the code
produced because there are two copies of each operation!

282

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

int get ( N e w C o u n t e r 2 x ){
r e t u r n get ( x . c );

}
void inc ( N e w C o u n t e r 2 x ){

inc ( x . c );

}
int h o w m a n y _ r e s e t s ( N e w C o u n t e r 2 x ){

r e t u r n x . n u m _ r e s e t ;

}

}

The solution is better than the previous one. The operations that do not have to be
modiﬁed are only called from inside a NewCounter (with its usual name overload-
ing), so that the last problem mentioned above is solved. There remains the task of
performing the calls explicitly even for the operations (such as get and inc) that
have not been modiﬁed: it would be preferable to have an automatic mechanism with
which to inherit the implementations of these two operations from Counter.

There remain problems, though, of how to handle in a uniform way the values of
Counter and of NewCounter2. Let us assume that we are dealing with a series
of counters, some simple, some enriched, and that we want to reset them all to their
initial value. To ﬁx ideas, we can imagine an array of counters; we want to reset each
element of this array to its initial value. A ﬁrst problem arises immediately when we
try to work out what the type of this array is. If we declare it as:

C o u n t e r V [ 1 0 0 ] ;

we cannot store NewCounter2s there because the two types are distinct. The same
thing happens when the array is declared as being of type NewCounter2. To solve
the problem, we need a concept of compatibility between the two types. Let us
remember that among the various forms of compatibility we discussed in Sect. 8.7,
we ﬁnd the following:

T is compatible with S when all the operations over values of type S are also possible over
values of type T.

We are now in exactly this case: all the operations on a Counter are possible also on
a NewCounter2 (on which we can apply an additional operation). It is, therefore,
sensible to require that a hypothetical language should relax the rigidity of ADTs,
admitting this form of compatibility. Let us therefore assume that NewCounter2
is compatible with Counter and is therefore permitted to have a vector declared
as Counter V[100] in which are stored both simple and extended counters. We
now come to the main point, which is to reset the initial value of each one of these
counters. The obvious idea is:

for ( int i =1; i < 1 0 0 ; i = i +1)

r e s e t ( V [ i ]);

which does not pose type problems. Overloading is solved, interpreting the body as
a call to the reset operation on Counter. All goes well with the type checker,
but what can be said about the state of NewCounter2 stored in the array? We

10.2 Fundamental Concepts

283

will expect that their num_reset ﬁelds have been incremented by one, but this
is not the case because the reset operation deﬁned in NewCounter2 has not
been executed, only the one deﬁned in Counter. Compatibility has solved the
problem of uniformly manipulating the values of the two types but in a certain sense
has destroyed encapsulation, allowing the application of an operation to a value of
type NewCounter2 which is not correct with reference to the ADT. A moment’s
reﬂection shows how the problem derives from the static solution to the overloading
of reset. If we could decide dynamically which reset to apply, depending upon
the “effective” type of the argument (that is on the type of the element stored in
the array before the coercion connected with compatibility is applied), this problem
would also be solved. Observe that this solution requires that the binding of a name of
an operation (reset) to its meaning (i.e., the code to be executed, that of Counter
of that of NewCounter2) be resolved at run-time.

10.1.1 A First Review

Abstract data types guarantee the encapsulation and hiding of information but they
are rigid when used in a design with a degree of complexity. From what has just been
said, it is not unreasonable to foresee constructs such as:

• They permit the encapsulation and hiding of information (as in ADTs).
• They are equipped with a mechanism which, under certain conditions, supports
the inheritance of the implementation of certain operations from other, already
given deﬁnitions.

• They are framed in a notion of compatibility deﬁned in terms of the operations

admissible for a certain construct.

• They allow the dynamic selection of operations, depending on the the “effective

type” of the arguments to which they are applied.

These four requirements are satisﬁed by the object-oriented paradigm. Rather, we
can take them as essential characteristics of this paradigm which separates an object-
oriented language from one which is not. We will discuss them in detail after intro-
ducing some basic concepts and once the terminology has been ﬁxed.

10.2 Fundamental Concepts

In this section, we will establish the fundamental concepts which organise the object-
oriented paradigm. We will begin by introducing some terminology and macroscopic
linguistic concepts (object, class, method, overriding, etc.), so that we can return to
the four aspects listed in Sect. 10.1.1. with the aim of discussing them in more detail.
We will take them in the following order:

284

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

1. Encapsulation and abstraction.
2. Subtypes, that is a compatibility relation based on the functionality of an object.
3. Inheritance, that is the possibility of reusing the implementation of a method

previously deﬁned in another object or for another class.

4. Dynamic method selection.

These are distinct mechanisms, each exhibited on its own by other paradigms. As will
be seen, it is their interaction that makes the object-oriented paradigm so attractive
to software design, even of large systems.

10.2.1 Objects

The principal construct of object-oriented languages is (clearly) that of object—
a capsule containing both data and operations manipulating those data. The capsule
provides an interface for the outside world through which the object is accessible.
The methodological idea that objects share with ADT is that data should “remain
together” with the operations that manipulate it. There is, then, a big conceptual dif-
ference between objects and ADTs (which is translated into a considerably different
notation). Although, in the deﬁnition of an ADT, data and operations are together,
when we declare a variable of an abstract type, that variable represents only the
data that can be manipulated using the operations. In our counters example, we can
declare a counter as Counter c and then increment it: inc(c). Each object, on
the other hand, is a container that (at least conceptually) encapsulates both data and
operations. A counter object, deﬁned using the same model as the deﬁnition that we
have given for Counter could be represented as in Fig. 10.1.

The ﬁgure suggests that we may imagine an object as a record. Some ﬁelds (usually
called “attributes” in this context) correspond to (modiﬁable) data, for example the
x ﬁeld; other ﬁelds correspond to the operations that are allowed to manipulate the
data (that is reset, get, and inc).

The operations are called methods (or functional ﬁelds or member functions) and
can access the data items held in the object, which are called instance variables
(or data members, or ﬁelds, or instance attributes). The execution of an operation is
performed by sending the object a message which consists of the name of the method

Fig. 10.1 An object for a
counter

10.2 Fundamental Concepts

285

to execute, possibly together with parameters.2 To represent such invocations, we
use the (Java, C++, Python, etc.) notation which reinforces the analogy with records:

o b j e c t . m e t h o d (parameters)

Below, we will often read the above notation as the “invocation of method
(with parameters parameters) on object” rather than “sending the message
method(parameters) to the object object”.

It is important to realize that the object receiving the message is, at the same time,
also a(n implicit) parameter to the invoked method. To increment a counter object, o,
which has the structure of Fig. 10.1, we will write o.inc() (“we ask the object, o,
to apply the method inc to itself”). The method, thus, acts on the receiving object,
triggering the execution of its code onto the receiving object. In the simple example
of Fig. 10.1, the code for the methods uses this to refer to the object receiving the
method.3 Also, the data members are accessible using the same mechanism (if they
are not hidden by the capsule, obviously). If an object, o, has an instance variable,
v, with o.v we request o for the value of v. While the notation remains uniform,
we note that accessing data is a mechanism that could be distinct from invoking a
method. Calling a method involves (or can involve) the dynamic selection of the
method that is to be executed, while access to a data item is static, although there
are exceptions to this (Python and the classless languages discussed in the box of
Sect. 10.2.2 being the main examples here).

The level of opacity of the capsule is deﬁned when the object is itself created.
Data can be more or less directly accessible from the outside (for example, data could
be directly inaccessible, with the object, instead, providing “observers”—recall the
box on Sect. 9.2), some operations can be visible everywhere, others visible to some
objects, while, ﬁnally, others are completely private, that is, available only inside the
object itself.

Together with objects, the languages of this paradigm also make available organ-
isational mechanisms for objects. These mechanisms permit the grouping of objects
with the same structure (or with similar structure). Although it is conceptually per-
mitted that every object truly contains its own data and methods, this would result
in enormous waste. In a single program, many objects would be used which are
differentiated between themselves only by the value of their data and not by their
structure or by their methods (for example, many counters, all analogous to the one
in Fig. 10.1). Without an organisational principle, which makes explicit the simi-
larity of all these objects, the program would loose expository clarity and would be
harder to document. Furthermore, from the implementation viewpoint, it is clear that
it would be appropriate for the code of each method to be stored only once, instead
of being copied inside each object with similar structure. To solve these problems,
every object-oriented language is based on some organisational principles. Among
these principles, the one that is by far the best known is that of classes, although

2 This is mostly Smalltalk terminology. C++ expresses the same thing by saying: calling the member
function of an object.
3 Another common name used for the receiving object is self.

286

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

there is a whole family of object-oriented languages that lack classes (which we will
brieﬂy describe in the box on Sect. 10.2.2).

10.2.2 Classes

A class is a model for a set of objects. It establishes what its data will be (type together
with their visibility) and ﬁxes name, signature, visibility and implementation for each
of its methods. In a language with classes, every object belongs to (at least) one class.
For example, an object such as that in Fig. 10.1 could be an instance of the following
class:

c l a s s C o u n t e r {

p r i v a t e int x ;
p u b l i c v o i d r e s e t (){

x = 0;

}
p u b l i c int get (){

r e t u r n x ;

}
p u b l i c v o i d inc (){

x = x +1;

}

}

It can be seen that the class contains the implementation of three methods which
are declared public (visible to all), while the instance variable x is private
(inaccessible from outside the object itself, but accessible in the implementation of
the methods of this class).

In a language with classes, objects are dynamically created by instantiation of their
class. A speciﬁc object is allocated whose structure is determined by its class. This
operation differs in fundamental ways from language to language and depends on the
linguistic status of classes. In Simula, a class is a procedure which returns a pointer to
an activation record containing local variables and function deﬁnitions (therefore, the
objects that are instances of a class are closures). In Smalltalk, a class is linguistically
an object which acts as a schema for the deﬁnition of the implementation of a set
of objects. In C++, Java or Python classes correspond to a type and all objects that
instantiate a class A are values of type A. Taking this viewpoint in Java, with its
reference-based model for variables, we can create a counter object:

C o u n t e r c = new C o u n t e r ();

The name c, of type Counter, is bound to a new object which is an instance of
Counter. We can create a new object, distinct from the previous one but with the
same structure, and bind it to another name:

C o u n t e r d = new C o u n t e r ();

To the right of the assignment symbol, we can see two distinct operations: the
creation of the objects (allocation of the necessary storage, new constructor) and

10.2 Fundamental Concepts

287

Fig. 10.2 The implementation of methods is inside classes

initialisation (invocation of the class’ constructor, represented by the name of the
class and parentheses—we will return to this shortly).4

We can certainly assume that the code for methods is stored one time only in its
class and that when an object needs to execute a speciﬁc method, this code would
be looked up in the class of which it is an instance. For this to happen, the method
code must correctly access the instance variables which are different for every object
and are, therefore, not all stored together in the class but inside the instance (as is
shown graphically in Fig. 10.2). In the ﬁgure, the methods of class Counter refer
to its instance variables using the name this. We have already seen that when an
object receives a message requesting the execution of a method, the object itself is
an implicit method parameter. When a reference is made to an instance variable in
the body of a method, there is an implicit reference to the object currently executing
the method. From the linguistic viewpoint, the current object is usually denoted by a
unique name, usually self or this. For example, the deﬁnition of the inc method
could be written as follows, where the reference to the current object is made explicit
via this:

p u b l i c v o i d inc (){

this . x = this . x +1;

}

4 In C++, unlike Java, it is also possible to create an object without invoking its constructor; C++
in fact allows the creation of objects on the stack (see Sect. 10.2.2).

288

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

Classless Languages

There also exist object-oriented languages without classes. These languages are called prototype- or
delegation-based, or simply classless object-oriented programming languages. In them, the organ-
ising principle (see the end of Sect. 10.2.1) is not the class, but the prototype—one object can
ask another object (its parent) to execute a method for it. The progenitor of this languages is Self
which was developed at Xerox PARC and Stanford towards the end of the 1980s, while the most
used language is probably JavaScript, which was designed to be distributed in the early versions of
Netscape, one of the ﬁrst web browsers, and which is still widely used on the client side of websites.
The ﬁelds of an object can contain values (simple data or other objects) or methods (that is,
code), or references to other objects (the parent of the object). An object is created from nothing, or
more often, by copying (or cloning) another object (which is called its prototype). Prototypes play
the methodological role of classes. They provide the model for the structuring and functioning for
other objects but are not special objects. Linguistically, they are ordinary objects, which, however,
are used not for computation, but as a model. When a prototype is cloned, the copy maintains a
reference to the prototype as its parent.

When an object receives a message but has no ﬁeld of that name, it passes the message to its
parent, and the process repeats. When the message reaches an object that understands it, the code
associated with the method is executed. The language ensures that the reference to self is correctly
resolved as a reference to the object that originally received the message. Usually, classless languages
do not distinguish between data attributes and methods—access to a data attribute corresponds to
sending a message, to which the object replies by returning the value of the ﬁeld. The selection of
a data attribute is thus usually dynamically resolved, as is the case for methods.

The delegation mechanism (and the uniﬁcation of code and data) makes inheritance more
powerful. It is possible and natural to create objects which share portions of data (in a language
based on classes, this is possible only using static data associated with classes; however, such a
template is too “static” to be proﬁtably used). Moreover, an object can change the reference to its
parent dynamically and thereby change its own behaviour.

In the case of a call to a method via this, the link between the method and the code
to which it is referring is dynamically determined. This is an important aspect of this
paradigm and we will discuss it in more detail in Sect. 10.2.6.

Some languages allow some variables and methods to be associated with classes
(and not with instances). These attributes are called class or static variables and
methods. Static variables are stored together in the class and static methods cannot,
obviously, refer to this in their body because that they have no current object.

Objects in the Heap and on the Stack

Every object-oriented language allows the dynamic creation of objects. Where
objects are created depends on the language. The most common solution is to allocate
objects in the heap and access them using references (which will be real pointers in
languages that permit them, but will be variables if the language supports a reference
model). Some languages allow explicit allocation and deallocation of objects in the
heap (C++ is one); others, probably the majority, opt instead for a garbage collector.
The option of creating objects on the stack like ordinary variables is not very
common. C++ is one such language. When a declaration of a variable of class type

10.2 Fundamental Concepts

289

is elaborated, the creation and initialisation of an object of that type is performed.
The object is assigned as a value to the variable.5 The two operations contributing
to the creation of an object (allocation and initialisation) occur implicitly in cases
where the constructor is not explicitly called. Some languages, ﬁnally, allow objects
to be created on the stack and left uninitialised.

In our pseudo-language, we assume that object creation occurs explicitly on the

heap and has a reference-variable model.

10.2.3 Encapsulation

Encapsulation and information hiding represent two of the cardinal points of data
abstraction. From the linguistic viewpoint, there is not much to add to what we have
already said. Every language allows the deﬁnition of objects by hiding some part of
them (either data or methods).6

In every class there are, therefore, at least two views: the private and the public
one. In the private view, everything is visible: it is the level of access possible inside
the class itself (by its methods). In the public view, however, only explicitly exported
information is visible. We say that the public information is the interface to a class,
by analogy with ADTs.7

At this level no great difference appear between object-oriented programming
languages and the forms of data abstraction that we have already discussed. The
encapsulation possible with objects, however, is much more ﬂexible and, more impor-
tantly, extensible than is possible with ADTs. But this will become clear only after
the discussion of subtypes and of dynamic method lookup.

10.2.4 Subtypes

A class naturally corresponds to the set of its instances—this set of objects is the
type associated with (deﬁned by) that class. In typed languages, this relation is
explicit. A class deﬁnition also introduces the deﬁnition of a type whose values are

5 Things are clearly different when a variable of type pointer-to-a-class type is declared. In this case,
no object is created (without an explicit request to do so).
6 Python does not provide any strong mechanism for preventing outside access to data stored in an
object. Attributes (data or methods) whose name starts with a double underscore and do not end with
a double underscore (that is, names of the form __foo) are called private names, and cannot be
accessed “as is” from outside the class where they are deﬁned. Access control, however, is obtained
by means of a lexical pre-processing of the text of the program (name mangling, in Python jargon):
a name __foo deﬁned in class C is transformed into _C__foo. Through the name _C__foo the
“private” attribute is accessible from everywhere.
7 The term “interface” means different things in different languages. In particular, do not confuse
our use of the term “interface” with what it means in Java—a special language construct, a sort of
class whose only components are names and method signatures, but which does not contain their
implementation, see Sect. 10.2.4.

290

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

the instances of that class. In typeless languages (like Smalltalk), the correspondence
is only conventional and implicit.

Among the types obtained through classes, a compatibility relation is deﬁned
(Sect. 8.7) in terms of the operations possible on values of the type. The type asso-
ciated with the class T is a subtype of S when every message understood (that is,
which can be received without generating an error) from objects of S is also under-
stood by the objects of T. If an object is represented as a record containing data and
functions,8 the subtype relation corresponds to the fact that T is a record type con-
taining all ﬁelds of S, as well, possibly, other ﬁelds. More precisely, taking account
of the fact that some ﬁelds of the two types could be private, we might say that T
is a subtype of S when the interface of S is a subset of the interface of T (note the
inversion: a subtype is obtained when we have a bigger interface).

Most languages (e.g., C++, Java, and Python) use a name-based equivalence for
types (see Sect. 8.6) which does not properly extend to a completely structural com-
patibility relation. In such languages, therefore, subtyping must be explicitly intro-
duced by the programmer. This is the role of the deﬁnition of subclasses, or derived
classes, which in our pseudo-language will be denoted using the neutral extending
construct9 :

c l a s s N a m e d C o u n t e r e x t e n d i n g C o u n t e r {

p r i v a t e S t r i n g n a m e ;
p u b l i c v o i d s e t _ n a m e ( S t r i n g n ){

name = n ;

}
p u b l i c S t r i n g g e t _ n a m e (){

r e t u r n name ;

}

}

The class NamedCounter is a subclass of Counter (which, in its turn is a
superclass of NamedCounter),10 that is the NamedCounter type is a subtype
of Counter. Instances of NamedCounter contain all the ﬁelds of Counter
(even its private ﬁelds, but they will be in general inaccessible in the subclass), in
addition to having new ﬁelds introduced by the deﬁnition. In this way, structural
compatibility is both guaranteed (a subclass is explicitly derived from its superclass)
and documented in the program text.

Redeﬁnition of a Method

In the example of NamedCounter, the subclass simply extends the interface of the
superclass. A fundamental characteristic of the subclass mechanism is the ability of
a subclass to modify the deﬁnition (the implementation) of a method present in its

8 That is, as a closure.
9 In place of extending, in C++, we write “: public”, while in Java extends or even
implements is used, depending upon whether a class or an interface is being extended; in Python
the base class(es) that are extended are listed in parenthesis after the new class name.
10 In C++, Counter is the base class and NamedCOunter is the derived class.

10.2 Fundamental Concepts

291

superclass. This mechanism is called method overriding.11 Our extended counters
from Sect. 10.1 can be deﬁned as a subclass of Counter as:

c l a s s N e w C o u n t e r e x t e n d i n g C o u n t e r {

p r i v a t e int n u m _ r e s e t = 0;
p u b l i c v o i d r e s e t (){

x = 0;
n u m _ r e s e t = n u m _ r e s e t + 1;

}
p u b l i c int h o w m a n y _ r e s e t s (){

r e t u r n n u m _ r e s e t ;

}

}

Class NewCounter simultaneously extends the interface of Counter with
new ﬁelds and redeﬁnes the reset method. A reset method sent to an instance
of NewCounter will cause the invocation of the new implementation.

Shadowing

This section refers to those languages, like Java or C++, where access to data ﬁelds
is static (as opposed to the dynamic access to methods). In addition to modifying
the implementation of a method, a subclass may also redeﬁne an instance variable
(or ﬁeld) deﬁned in a superclass. In languages where the access to instance ﬁeld
is static, this mechanism is called shadowing.12 For implementation reasons (to be
seen below), shadowing is signiﬁcantly different from overriding. For the present,
we merely note that, in a subclass, an instance variable can be redeﬁned with the
same name and same type as that in the superclass. We could, for example, modify
our extended counters using the following subclass of NewCounter where, for
some (strange) reason, the initial value of num_reset is initialised to 2 and is
incremented by 2 each time:

c l a s s E v e n N e w C o u n t e r e x t e n d i n g N e w C o u n t e r {

p r i v a t e int n u m _ r e s e t = 2;
p u b l i c v o i d r e s e t (){

x = 0;
n u m _ r e s e t = n u m _ r e s e t + 2;

}
p u b l i c int h o w m a n y _ r e s e t s (){

r e t u r n n u m _ r e s e t ;

}

}

Using the usual notion of visibility in block-structured languages, each reference to
num_reset inside EvenNewCounter refers to the local variable (initialised to 2)

11 Method overriding is a mechanism which interacts in a very subtle way with other aspects of the
object-oriented paradigm, in particular with the dynamic selection of methods; for the time being,
we will note only this possibility, returning to this question in due course.
12 Let us note explicitly that in Python there is no shadowing, since access to any attribute (being it
data or method) is dynamic.

292

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

Subtypes in Smalltalk?

Among the essential characteristics of the object-oriented paradigm, we have included subtypes.
On the other hand, there are object-oriented languages which do not have types (at least do not have
types over which we can perform any signiﬁcant checking). Smalltalk is one of these languages.
How can we have subtypes in a language without types?

When we gave the deﬁnition of subtype, we were careful to include the case of Smalltalk as
well of other untyped languages. Recall that T is a subtype of S when the interface of S is a subset
of the interface of T. That is, when we may freely use an object of class T (that is without generating
errors) in place of one of class S. This operational deﬁnition, which is expressed in terms of the
substitution of objects, makes perfect sense even in an untyped context, once we associate the set
of its instances (its “type”) with the class T.

On the other hand, when in the language there is no linguistic notion of subtype, it is only in
the reﬂection of the designers that the presence of such a relationship becomes clear. In particular,
in Smalltalk the deﬁnition of a subclass does not generate a subtype because Smalltalk allows
subclasses to remove methods from their superclass.

and not to the one declared in NewCounter. A reset message sent to an instance
of EvenNewCounter will cause the invocation of the new implementation for
reset which will use the new num_reset ﬁeld. However, as we will see below,
there is a big difference, both at the semantic as well as at the implementation levels,
between overriding and shadowing.

Abstract Classes

For simplicity of exposition, we have introduced the type associated with a class as
the set of its instances. Many languages, however, permit the deﬁnition of classes that
cannot have instances because the class lacks the implementation of some method. In
such classes, there is only the name and the type (that is, the signature) of one or more
methods—their implementation is omitted. Classes of this type are called abstract
classes. Abstract classes serve to provide interfaces and can be given implementations
in subclasses that redeﬁnes (in this case, deﬁne for the ﬁrst time) the method lacking
an implementation.13 Abstract classes also correspond to types and the mechanism
that provides implementations for their methods also generates subtypes.

The Subtype Relation

In general, languages ban cycles in the subtype relation between classes, that is, we
cannot have both A subtype B and B subtype A, unless A and B coincide. The subtype
relation is, therefore, a partial order. In many languages, this relation has a maximal
element: the type of which all other types deﬁned by classes are subtypes. We will
denote such a type with the name Object. Messages that an instance of Object

13 A method for which there is only a signature is, in Java and Python, an abstract method; in C++,
it is a pure virtual member function. A Java interface is a sort of completely abstract class: its only
components are names and method signatures, but it does not contain any implementation.

10.2 Fundamental Concepts

293

Fig. 10.3 The subtype
relation is not a tree

accepts are fairly limited (it is an object of maximum generality). We ﬁnd in general
a method for cloning which returns a copy of the object, an equality method and
a few others. Moreover, some of these methods could be abstract in Object and
therefore require redeﬁnition before they can be used.

It can be seen that it is not guaranteed that, given a type A, there exists a unique

type B which is the immediate supertype of A. In the following example:

a b s t r a c t c l a s s A {

p u b l i c int f ();

}

a b s t r a c t c l a s s B {

p u b l i c int g ();

}

c l a s s C e x t e n d i n g A , B {

p r i v a t e x = 0;
p u b l i c int f (){
r e t u r n x ;

}
p u b l i c int g (){

r e t u r n x +1;

}

}

The type C is a subtype of A as well as of B and there is no other type included
between C and the other two. The subtype hierarchy is not a tree in general, but just
an acyclic oriented graph (see Fig. 10.3, and Sect. 10.2.5, below).

Constructors

We have already seen that an object is a complex structure which includes data and
code all wrapped up together. The creation of an object is therefore an operation
which consists of two distinct actions: ﬁrst the allocation of necessary memory (in
the heap or on the stack), then the proper initialisation of the object’s data. These
actions are performed by the constructor of the class. That is, by code associated with
the class and which the language guarantees will execute at exactly the same time
any instance is created. The constructor mechanism is of some complexity because
the data in an object could consist not only of that explicitly declared in the class
whose instance is being created, but also the data declared in its superclasses. In
addition, more than one constructor is sometimes permitted for a class. Therefore, a
series of questions about constructors can be summarised as the following:

294

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

• Constructor selection. If a language allows more than one constructor for a class,
how the appropriate constructor is choosen when creating a speciﬁc object? In
some languages (for example C++ and Java), the name of the constructor is the
same as the name of the class. Multiple constructors all have the same name and
must be distinguished either by their type or the number of the arguments or
both (they are therefore overloaded, with static resolution). Since C++ permits
the implicit creation of objects on the stack, there are speciﬁc mechanisms for
selecting the appropriate constructor to use in each case.14 Other languages allow
the programmer to choose constructor names freely (but the constructors remain
syntactically distinct from ordinary methods) and require that every creation oper-
ation (our new) is always associated with a constructor. In Python the constructor
involves the special methods __init__ and __new__, whose explicit deﬁnition in
a class is not not mandatory—if a class does not contain a deﬁnition for them, that
class inherits them (see below) from its superclasses. If none of the superclasses
contain methods __init__ and __new__, the ones predeﬁned for object are used.
Hence Python allows the creation of essentially un-initialized objects (since the
__init__ of object does only some minimal bookkeeping.)

• Constructor chaining. How and when is the part of object that belongs to the super-
class initialised? Some languages limit themselves to executing the constructor of
the class whose instance they are constructing. If the programmer intends calling
superclass constructors, it must be done explicitly. Other languages (among them
C++ and Java) guarantee, on the other hand, that when an object is initialised, the
constructor for its super class will be invoked (constructor chaining) before any
other operations are performed by the constructor speciﬁc to the subclass. Python,
coherently with its design principle to defer any choice to the programmer, does
not provide constructor chaining—any constructor of the superclasses must be
explicitly called by the constructor of the subclasses. Once more, there are many
issues which each language has to resolve. Among these, the two most important
are determining which superclass constructor to invoke (if multiple constructors
are allowed) and how to determine its arguments.

Finally, let us note that some languages allow instances that do not conform to the
structure speciﬁed in the class deﬁnition. A notable example is again Python, where
one can dynamically add (or delete) attributes to any instance of (almost) any class.
Therefore, at a certain moment during execution, we may have instances of the same
class which do not all share the same structure as deﬁned in the class constructor.
Moreover, since also a class is an object (instance of the class type, in Python 3), we
can dynamically change the structure of a class, including changing the initialization
method __init__. This is consistent with the “dynamic” behavior of all the Python
abstract machine. As a consequence, any access to the attribute of an object must be
resolved dynamically, with the corresponding overhead in time that this requires.

14 The case of a constructor which takes a single object as the argument (a copy constructor in C++
jargon) is especially tricky and the source of many programming errors.

10.2 Fundamental Concepts

10.2.5 Inheritance

295

A subclass can redeﬁne the methods of its superclass. But what happens when the
subclass does not redeﬁne them? In such cases, the subclass inherits methods from
the superclass, in the sense that the implementation of the method in the superclass is
made available to the subclass. For example, NewCounter inherits from Counter
the data item x and methods inc and get (but not reset which is redeﬁned).

More generally (including in our deﬁnition, phenomena also present in class-less
object-oriented languages), we can characterise inheritance as a mechanism which
permits the deﬁnition of new objects based on the reuse of pre-existing ones.

Inheritance permits code reuse in an extendable context. By modifying the imple-
mentation of a method, a class automatically makes the modiﬁcation available to all
its subclasses, with no intervention required on the part of the programmer.

Is important to understand the difference between the relation of inheritance and
that of subtype. The concept of subtype has to do with the possibility of using an
object in another context. It is a relation between the interfaces of two classes. The
concept of inheritance has to do with the possibility of reusing the code which
manipulates an object. It is a relation between the implementations of two classes.
We are dealing with two mechanisms which are completely independent, even if
they are often linguistically associated in several object-oriented languages. C++,
Java, and Python have constructs which can simultaneously introduce both relations
between the two classes, but this does not mean that the concepts are the same. In
the literature, we sometimes see the distinction between implementation inheritance
(inheritance) and interface inheritance (our subtype relation).

Inheritance and Visibility

We have already seen that there are two views of each class: the private and the
public, with the latter shared between all the clients of the class. A subclass is a
particular client of the superclass. It uses the methods of the superclass to extend
the functionality of the superclass, but sometimes it has to access some non-public
data. Many languages therefore introduce a third view of a class: one for subclasses.
Taking the term from C++, we can refer to it as the protected view of a class.15

If the subclass has access to some details of the super class’ implementation,
the subclass depends in a much tighter way on the superclass. Every modiﬁcation
of the superclass will require a modiﬁcation of the subclass. From the pragmatic
viewpoint, this is reasonable only if the two classes are “close” to each other, for
example belonging to the same package. The stronger the pairing of the two classes,
the more the resulting system becomes difﬁcult to modify and maintain. However,
making protected and public interfaces coincide can be too restrictive. We may think
of a class hierarchy providing data structures that gradually become more specialised.

15 Java also has a protected visibility modiﬁer, which is, though, more liberal than that in C++;
it grants visibility to an entire package and not just to classes.

296

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

Inheritance and Subtypes in Java

The subtype relation is introduced in Java using either the extends clause (to deﬁne subclasses)
or the implements clause when a class is declared a subtype of one or more interfaces (for Java,
an interface is a kind of incomplete abstract class in which only names and method signatures are
included—they do not include implementations). The inheritance relation is introduced with the
extends clause whenever the subclass does not redeﬁne a method and therefore uses an implemen-
tation from the superclass. It should be noted that in our terminology there is never inheritance from
an interface because the interface has nothing to be inherited. The language constrains every class
to having a single immediate superclass (that is a single superclass can be named in an extends),
but allows that a single class (or interface) implements more than one interface:

i n t e r f a c e A {

int f ();

}
i n t e r f a c e B {

int g ();

}
c l a s s C {

int x ;
int h (){

r e t u r n x +2;

}

}
c l a s s D e x t e n d s C i m p l e m e n t s A , B {

int f (){

r e t u r n x ;

}
int g (){

r e t u r n x +1;

}

}

Java therefore has single inheritance. The inheritance hierarchy is a tree organised by
extends clauses. The inheritance relation is, in Java, always a subhierarchy of the subtype hier-
archy.

The situation of the example, when at the same time we have inheritance from superclass
and implementation of some abstract interface, is sometimes called mix-in inheritance (because the
names of the abstract methods in the interface are mixed in with the inherited implementations).
As usual, current terminology is often imprecise and confuses subtypes with inheritance. In many
manuals (and even in the ofﬁcial deﬁnition of Java), it is said that Java has single inheritance
for classes, but multiple inheritance for interfaces. According to our terminology there is no true
inheritance where interfaces are involved.

Being able to access the representation of the data structures, the subclass will be
able to implement its own operations in a more efﬁcient way.

10.2 Fundamental Concepts

297

Single and Multiple Inheritance

In some languages, a class can inherit from a single immediate superclass. The
inheritance hierarchy is therefore a tree and we say that the language has single
(or simple) inheritance. Other languages, on the other hand, allow a class to inherit
methods from more than one immediate superclass; the inheritance hierarchy in such
a case is an acyclic oriented graph and the language has multiple inheritance.

Multiple inheritance is less common than single inheritance (although much
used languages like C++ and Python both provide multiple inheritance), because
it presents problems that do not have an elegant solution at either the conceptual or
implementation level. The fundamental problems relate to name clashes. We have a
name clash when a class C simultaneously inherits from A and B, which both pro-
vide implementation for methods with the same signature. The following is a simple
example:

c l a s s A {

int x ;
int f (){

r e t u r n x ;

}

}
c l a s s B {

int y ;
int f (){

r e t u r n y ;

}

}
c l a s s C e x t e n d i n g A , B {

int h (){

r e t u r n f ();

}

}

Which of the two methods named f is inherited in C? We can solve this problem

in three different ways, none of which is totally satisfactory:

1. Forbid name clashes syntactically.
2. Require that any conﬂict should be resolved by the programmer’s appropriately
qualifying every reference to a name that is in conﬂict. For example, the body of
h in class C, should be written as B::f() or as A::f(), which is the solution
adopted by C++.

3. Decide upon a convention for solving the conﬂict, for example favouring the class

which is named ﬁrst in the extending clause.

From the pragmatic point of view, it is possible to give examples of situations in
which any of these solutions is unnatural and counterintuitive. As for the explicit
solution, its main drawback is that the programmer must know the class hierarchy.
This could be difﬁcult, especially because—as it is common with object-oriented
design—the conﬂict could arise only much after the classes A, B, and C have been
deﬁned. (Suppose that f is not used directly in C, but it is invoked on instances of
subclasses of C, deﬁned only much later.)

298

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

Inheritance and Subtypes in C++

The C++ mechanisms that allow for the deﬁnition of the inheritance relation, and those responsible
for subtyping, are not independent. The deﬁnition of derived classes (the C++ term for subclass)
introduces the inheritance relation. It also introduces a subtype relation when the derived class
declares its base class (that is the superclass) as public; when the base class is not public, the
derived class inherits from the base class but there is not subtype relation.

c l a s s A {
p u b l i c :

void f ( ) { . . . }
...

}
c l a s s B : p u b l i c A {
p u b l i c :

void g ( ) { . . . }
...

}
c l a s s C : A {
p u b l i c :

void h ( ) { . . . }
...

}

Both classes B and C inherit from A but only B is a subtype of A.
Since the subtype relation follows that of subclass, with the tools seen so far, we could
not introduce an interface subtype, that is, a class derived from a base class which provides no
implementations but just ﬁxes an interface. It is to this end that C++ introduces the concept of
abstract base class, in which some methods need not have an implementation. In such cases, as
with Java interfaces, we can have subtypes without inheritance.

Fig. 10.4 The diamond
problem for multiple
inheritance

their choice and inherit ﬁrst from A,

Languages like Python opt for the third option. If the programmer says
then from
extending A,B, respect
B. Despite the apparent simplicity of this solution, it comes with its own problems,
which become manifest in the so-called diamond situation. This case arises when a
class inherits from two superclasses, each of which inherits from the same, single
superclass. A situation of this kind is the following (the diamond-shaped inheritance
hierarchy is shown graphically in Fig. 10.4). The essential points of the example are:
(i) the method f is deﬁned in Top and A, but not in B; (ii) Bottom inherits directly
from A and B and does not overrides f.

10.2 Fundamental Concepts

299

c l a s s Top {

int w ;
int f (){

r e t u r n w ;

}

}
c l a s s A e x t e n d i n g Top {

int x ;
int g (){

r e t u r n w + x ;

}

}
c l a s s B e x t e n d i n g Top {

int y ;
int f (){

r e t u r n w + y ;

}
int k (){

r e t u r n y ;

}

}
c l a s s B o t t o m e x t e n d i n g A , B {

int z ;
int h (){

r e t u r n z ;

}

}

An invocation of f on an instance of Bottom causes no problem—the program
text says class Bottom extending A,B, and in A we ﬁnd a deﬁnition for f.
Suppose, instead, that in the deﬁnition of Bottom the superclasses are listed in the
opposite order:

c l a s s B o t t o m e x t e n d i n g B , A

Which f should be inherited from an instance of Bottom? The program (in the
extending clause) says to look ﬁrst in B, where there is no deﬁnition for f,
but where we inherit f from Top. Should Bottom therefore inherit f from Top?
Possible, but we could also argue that it should inherit instead from A, because the
program explicitly says that after B we should look in A, and the programmer already
took the decision that in A—and thus in its subclasses—f should be redeﬁned.

The apparently simple “conventional” solution to multiple inheritance should
therefore come together with some sophisticated solution for handling cases like
the one we just discussed. This is the role of the Method Resolution Order (MRO)
algorithm of a language, which, for any class deﬁnition, computes the order in which
its superclasses are visited to decide from which superclass a particular method is
inherited (see the box on Sect. 10.2.6 for the MRO of Python.)

On top of all of this, we also have an implementation issue—devising a technique
allowing the correct and efﬁcient selection of the code for f when this method is
invoked on an instance of class Bottom. We will deal with this in Sect. 10.3.4.

300

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

Method Resolution Order in Python

The changes in the deﬁnition of the MRO across various versions of Python are a good example
of the subtleties of multiple inheritance. Let us recall that an MRO algorithm computes, for any
class deﬁnition, the order in which its superclasses are visited to decide from which superclass a
particular method is inherited. It is, therefore, a way to visit (a portion of) the graph describing the
subclass hierarchy, to obtain a linear order which starts at the given class and ends in one maximal
class.

In Python 2.2 the MRO algorithm performs a deep-ﬁrst visit of the graph, respecting the
order speciﬁed in the class deﬁnitions. It was noted, however, that the implemented algorithm was
not monotonic—there were cases in which the MRO of a subclass was not an extension without
re-ordering of the MROs of its superclasses—a requirement which seems instead fundamental. It
was thus decided to adopt an algorithm that (i) it is monotonic: If C1 precedes C2 in the MRO of
C, then C1 precedes C2 in the MRO of any subclass of C; and (ii) it preserves the local precedence
ordering: If we have a deﬁnition A(B,C,D), then in A’s MRO, B precedes C which precedes D.
The result is the MRO algorithm used by default starting from Python 3.0 (and which is the one
that was used before for the Dylan and CLOS programming languages.)

Sometimes, however, the two constraints (i) and (ii) above cannot be simultaneously enforced.
In this case, the MRO algorithm fails—a program which otherwise would be legal is instead incor-
rect, only because a consistent MRO cannot be computed. One of the simplest such programs is the
following.

class CC : pass
class DD : pass
class AA ( CC , DD ): pass
class BB ( DD , CC ): pass
class EE ( AA , BB ): pass

# c o n s i s t e n t if we d e f i n e d BB ( CC , DD )

Indeed, the MRO of AA is trivial—local precedence gives {CC, DD, object}, in this order,
and the same happens for the MRO of BB: {DD, CC, object}. However, trying to compute
the MRO for EE we see that monotonicity would impose that both CC precedes DD (from the MRO
of AA) and DD precedes CC (from the MRO of BB.)

In conclusion, multiple inheritance is a highly ﬂexible tool for the combination
of abstractions corresponding to distinct functionalities. Some of the situations in
which it works are in reality better expressed using subtype relations (“inheriting”
from abstract classes). There are no simple, unequivocal, and elegant solutions to the
problems that multiple inheritance poses. The cost beneﬁt balance between single
and multiple inheritance is equivocal.

10.2.6 Dynamic Method Lookup

Dynamic method lookup (or dispatch) is the heart of the object-oriented paradigm.
In this, the characteristics that have already been discussed combine to form a new
synthesis. In particular, dynamic method lookup allows compatibility of subtypes
and abstraction to coexist. This is something that was seen to be problematic for
abstract data types (Sect. 10.1.1).

Conceptually, the mechanism is simple. We already know that a method deﬁned
in one class can be redeﬁned (overridden) in subclasses. Therefore when a method,

10.2 Fundamental Concepts

301

Fig. 10.5 Two classes for
counters

m, is invoked on an object, o, there can be many versions of m possible for o—the
deﬁnitions of m given in the class in which o has been created, and all its superclasses.
The selection of which implementation for m is to be used in an invocation

o . m (parameters);

is a function of the type of the object receiving the message. Note that what is relevant
is the type of the object which receives the message, not the type of the reference
(or name) to that object (which is instead static information, in languages requiring
that names be declared).

Let us give an example in our pseudo-language with classes. Figure 10.5 repeats
the counters discussed in Sects. 10.2.2 and 10.2.4. In the context of these class
declarations, we now execute the following fragment:

C o u n t e r c = new N e w C o u n t e r ();
c . r e s e t ();

The (static) type of the name c is Counter but it refers (dynamically) to an instance
of NewCounter. So it will be the reset method of NewCounter that is invoked.
The canonical example is the one which (negatively) concluded Sect. 10.1. Both
Counter and NewCounter are stored in a data structure whose type is their
supertype:

C o u n t e r V [ 1 0 0 ] ;

Now we apply the reset method to each:

for ( int i =1; i < 1 0 0 ; i = i +1)

V [ i ]. r e s e t ();

302

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

Dynamic lookup assures us that the correct method will be invoked on any counter.
In general, a compiler will be unable to decide what will be the type of the object
whose method will be invoked, hence the dynamicity of this mechanism.

The reader should have noted a certain analogy between overloading and dynamic
method lookup. In both cases, the problem is the same: that of resolving an ambiguous
situation in which a single name can have more than one meaning. Under overloading,
though, the ambiguity is resolved statically, based on the type of the names involved.
In method lookup, on the other hand, the solution of the problem is at runtime and
makes use of the dynamic type of the object and not of its name. It is not, however,
a mistake to think of method lookup as a runtime overloading operation in which
the object receiving the message is considered the ﬁrst (implicit) argument of the
method whose name has to be resolved.16

Is important to observe explicitly that dynamic method lookup is at work even
when a method in an object invokes a method in the same object, as happens in the
next fragment:

c l a s s A {

int f (){ r e t u r n g ();}
int g (){ r e t u r n 1;}

}
c l a s s B e x t e n d i n g A {

int g (){ r e t u r n 1 0 0 ; }

}

Let us now assume that we have an instance b of B and we invoke on b the method
f (inherited from A.) Now, f calls g: which of the two implementations of g will be
executed? Recall that the object which receives the message is also a parameter to the
method. The call of g in the body of f can be written more explicitly as this.g(),
where, recall, this is a reference to the current object. The current object is b and
therefore the method which will be invoked is that of class B. In this way, a call to
a method such as this.g() in the body of f can refer to (implementations of)
methods that are not yet written and which will be available only later through the
class hierarchy. This mechanism, through which the name this becomes bound
dynamically to the current object, is called late binding of self (or, of this).

Some languages (e.g., Python) even allow postponing the deﬁnition of a method
used in a class. Let us rewrite the previous example in Python, omitting from A the
deﬁnition of g. The following is legal Python code:

c l a s s A :

def f ( self ):

r e t u r n self . g ()

c l a s s B ( A ):

16 The reader will not be surprised if, once more, object-oriented programming jargon contributes to
the confusion. It is not uncommon to hear (and to see written) that dynamic method lookup permits
polymorphism. In our terminology there is no polymorphism because we are not in the presence of a
single, uniform piece of code. It is possible to talk of polymorphism in object-oriented programming
but this has to do with subtypes. We will deal with this in Sect. 10.4.1.

10.2 Fundamental Concepts

303

Dynamic Dispatch in C++

In languages like Java or Smalltalk, each method invocation happens using dynamic dispatch. C++
has, as its design goals, efﬁciency of execution and compatibility with C, meaning by this that the
use of a C construct in a C++ program must be as efﬁcient as in C.

In C++, we have, therefore, static method dispatch (analogous to function call), as well as
a form of dynamic dispatch which is performed using virtual functions. When a method (that is
a member function in C++ terminology) is deﬁned, it is possible to specify whether it is a virtual
function or not. Only the overriding of virtual functions is permitted. Dynamic dispatch is performed
on virtual member functions.

Let us note, incidentally, that it is not forbidden to deﬁne, in some class, a function of the
same name and signature as a non-virtual function deﬁned in the superclass. In such a case, we do
not have redeﬁnition, but overloading, and this can be resolved statically by the compiler using the
type of the name used to refer to that object. In the example that follows we declare a class A and a
subclass B:

c l a s s A {
p u b l i c :

void f (){ p r i n t f ( " A " );}
v i r t u a l void g (){ p r i n t f ( " A " );}

}
c l a s s B : p u b l i c A {
p u b l i c :

void f (){ p r i n t f ( " B " );}
v i r t u a l void g (){ p r i n t f ( " B " );}

}

If, now, we have a pointer a of type A*, which points to an instance of B, invocation of the

function a->f() prints A, while invocation of the virtual function a->g() prints B.

def g ( self ):

r e t u r n 100

even if the body of f in A calls a method g which is not yet deﬁned.17 We say in this
case that the class A delegates (the deﬁnition of) the method g. We may even create
instances of A, although any call to f on such instances would result in a (run-time)
error.

Let us explicitly note that, unlike overriding, shadowing (when present) is a com-

pletely static mechanism. Consider, for example, the code:

c l a s s A {

int a = 1;
int f (){ r e t u r n - a ;}

}
c l a s s B e x t e n d i n g A {

int a = 2;

17 Note that the deﬁnition of A could be compiled and executed even without the deﬁnition of B be
present.

304

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

Multimethod Languages

In the languages we have considered so far, a method invocation has the form:

o . m (parameters);

Dynamic method lookup uses the run-time type of the object receiving the method, while uses
the static types of the parameters. In some other languages (for example, CLOS), this asymmetry
is removed. Methods are no longer associated with classes but are global names. Each method
name is overloaded by a number of implementations (which in this case are called multimethods)
and the object on which the method is invoked is passed to every multimethod. When invoking a
multimethod, the code that must be executed is chosen dynamically on the basis of the (dynamic)
type of both the receiver and all the arguments.

In these languages, we speak of multiple dispatch rather than single dispatch in languages

where there exists a privileged receiver.

In languages with multiple dispatch, the analogy between (multiple) dynamic dispatch and
“dynamic overloading” is more evident; multiple dispatch consists in the (runtime) resolution of an
overloading on the basis of dynamic type information.

int f (){ r e t u r n a ;}

}

B o b j _ b = new B ();
print ( obj_b . f ());
p r i n t ( o b j _ b . a );

A o b j _ a = o b j _ b ;
print ( obj_a . f ());
p r i n t ( o b j _ a . a );

where print denotes a method which outputs the integer value passed as an argu-
ment. The ﬁrst two invocations of print produce the value 2 twice, as should be
obvious. The third call will also print the value 2, given that, as already seen above,
the method f has been redeﬁned in class B. In fact the object created (with new
B()) is an instance of B, and hence every access to it, even those through a variable
of type A (as in the case of obj_a), uses the redeﬁned method (which is obvi-
ously using the redeﬁned ﬁelds in class B). The last occurrence of print, instead,
produces the value 1. In this case, in fact, given that we are not dealing with the
invocation of a method but accessing a ﬁeld, it is the type of the current reference
which determines which ﬁeld is to be considered. Given that obj_a is of type A,
when we write obj_a.a, the ﬁeld in question is the one in class A (initialised to
one).

This distinction between overriding and shadowing, is explained at the imple-
mentation level using the fact that the instance object of class B also contains all the
ﬁelds of the superclasses of B, as we will make clear in the next section.

10.3 Implementation Aspects

305

10.3 Implementation Aspects

Every language has its own implementation model which is optimised to the speciﬁc
features that the language provides. We will be content to suggest some of the main
problems and their solution.

Objects

An instance object of class A can be used as the value of any superclass of A. In
particular, it is possible to access not just the instance variables (data ﬁelds) explicitly
deﬁned in A, but also those deﬁned in its superclasses. In languages where access
to instance variables is a static operation (like Java or C++, but not Python) an
object can be represented as if it were a record, with as many ﬁelds as there are
variables in the class of which it is an instance, in addition to all those appearing
in its superclasses. In a case of shadowing, when a name of an instance variable
of the class is used with the same type in a subclass, the object contains additional
ﬁelds, each one corresponding to a different declaration (often, the name used in the
superclass is not accessible in the subclass, if not using particular qualiﬁcations, for
example super). The representation also contains a pointer to the descriptor of the
class of which it is an instance.

In the case of a language with a static type system, this representation allows the
simple implementation of subtype compatibility (in the case of single inheritance).
For each instance variable, the offset from the start of the record is statically recorded.
If access to an instance object of a class is performed using a (static) reference having
as type one of the superclasses of that object, static type checking ensures that access
can be made only to a ﬁeld deﬁned in the superclass, which is allocated in the initial
part of the record.

Classes and Inheritance

The representation of classes is the key to an object oriented abstract machine. The
simplest and most intuitive implementation is the one which represents the class
hierarchy using a linked list. Each element represents a class and contains (pointers
to) the implementation of the methods that are either deﬁned or redeﬁned in that
class. Class descriptors are linked using a pointer from the subclass to its immediate
superclass. When a method m of an object o instance of a class C is invoked, the
pointer stored in o is used to access the descriptor of C and determine whether C
contains an implementation of m. If it does not, the list of the class hierarchy is
used and the procedure is repeated on the immediate superclass of C (see Fig. 10.6),
keeping going up in the superclass hierarchy until a deﬁnition for m is found or we
reach a maximal class (in which case an error is raised.) This simple approach is used
in Smalltalk and Python. It is, however, inefﬁcient because every method invocation
requires a linear scan of the class hierarchy. This scan is unavoidable if a language
allows the dynamic change of the attributes of a class or of single instances (like is
the case for Python.) We will shortly discuss more efﬁcient implementations after
we have seen how to access instance variables from within a method invocation.

306

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

Fig. 10.6 A naive implementation of inheritance

Late Binding of Self

A method is executed in a way similar to a function. An activation record for the
method’s local variables, parameters and all the other information is pushed onto the
stack. Unlike a function, though, a method must also access the instance variables
of the object on which it is called, but this object is still unknown at compile time.
However, if we may assume that any object is created on the blueprint given by a
class,18 the structure of such an object is known (it depends on the class) and, there-
fore, the offset of every instance variable in an object’s representation is statically
known (subject to conditions depending upon the language). A pointer to the object
which received the method is then passed as a parameter when a method is invoked.
During execution of the body of the method, this pointer is the method’s this.
When the method is invoked on the same object that invokes it, this still is passed
as a parameter. During the execution of the method, every access to an instance vari-
able uses the offset from this pointer (instead of having an offset from a pointer into
the activation records, as is the case for local variables of functions). The pointer
this could be passed through the activation record, like all other parameters, but
this would cause a doubly-indirect access for every instance variable (one to access
the pointer using the activation record pointer and one to access the variable using
this). More efﬁciently, the abstract machine will maintain the current value of this
in a register.

10.3.1 Single Inheritance

Under the hypothesis that the language have a static type system, the implementation
using linked lists can be replaced by another, more efﬁcient one, in which method
selection requires constant time (rather than time linear in the depth of the class
hierarchy).

If types are static, the set of methods that any object can invoke is known at compile
time. The list of these methods is kept in the class descriptor. The list contains not

18 This is the case for C++ and Java, but cannot be guaranteed in Python, where attributes could be
added to or removed from single instances of a class.

10.3 Implementation Aspects

307

just the methods that are explicitly deﬁned or redeﬁned in the class but also all the
methods inherited from its superclasses.19 Following C++’s terminology, we will
use the term vtable (virtual function table) to refer to this data structure. Each class
deﬁnition has its own vtable and all instances of the same class share the same vtable.
When a subclass, B, of the class A is deﬁned, B’s vtable is generated by copying the
one for A, replacing all the methods redeﬁned in B and adding the new methods that
B deﬁnes at the bottom (this is shown in Fig. 10.7).

The fundamental property of this data structure is, that, if B is a subclass of A,
B’s vtable contains a copy of A’s vtable as its initial part; redeﬁned methods are
appropriately modiﬁed. In this way, the method invocation costs only two indirect
accesses, the offset of every method in the vtable being statically known. It can be
seen that this implementation obviously takes into account the fact that it is possible
to access an object with a reference that belongs statically to one of its superclasses.
In the example in Fig. 10.7, when method f is invoked, the compiler computes an
offset that remains the same whether f is invoked on an object of class A or on
an object of class B. Different implementations of f deﬁned in the two classes are
located at the same offset into the vtables of A and B.

On the whole, if we have a static reference pa of class A to some object of one of
its subclasses, we can compile a call to method f (which, we assume to be the nth
in A’s vtable) as follows (we have assumed that the address of a method occupies w
bytes):

R1 := pa
R2 := *( R1 )
R3 := *( R2 + (n − 1) × w)
call *( R3 )

// a c c e s s the o b j e c t
// v t a b l e
// i n d i r e c t to f
// call f

Ignoring support for multiple inheritance, this implementation scheme is substan-

tially the one used in C++.

Downcasting

If a class’ vtable also contains the name of the class itself, the implementation we
have discussed allows downward casts in the class hierarchy (downcasting), which is
a fairly frequently used mechanism. It permits the specialisation of the type of object
by running in the opposite direction to the subtype hierarchy. A canonical example
of the use of this mechanism is found in some library methods which are deﬁned to
be as general as possible. The class Object might use the following signature to
deﬁne a method for copying objects:

O b j e c t c l o n e ( ) { . . . }

The semantics is that clone returns an exact copy of the object which invoked
it (same class, same values in its ﬁelds, etc.). If we have an object o of class A,

19 We are assuming that dynamic lookup applies to all methods. In cases like C++, where only
virtual methods can be redeﬁned, the descriptor contains only the latter, while ordinary method
calls are treated like normal function calls.

308

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

Fig. 10.7 Implementation of simple inheritance

an invocation of o.clone() will return an instance of A, but the static type as
determined by the compiler for this expression is Object. In order to be able
meaningfully to use this new copy, we have to “force” it to type A, which we can
indicate with a cast:

A a = ( A ) o . c l o n e ();

By this, we mean that the abstract machine checks that the dynamic type of the

object really is A (in the opposite case, we would have a runtime type error).20

10.3.2 The Problem of Fragile Base Class

In the case of simple inheritance, the implementation of the mechanism described
above is reasonably efﬁcient, given that all the important information, except the
pointer this, is statically determined. This staticity, though, can be shown to be the
source of problems in a context known as the fragile base class problem.

An object-oriented system is organised in terms of a very large number of classes
using an elaborate inheritance hierarchy. Often some of these general classes are
provided by libraries. Modiﬁcations to a class located very high in the hierarchy,
can be felt in its subclasses. Some superclasses can, therefore, behave in a “fragile”
manner because an apparently innocuous modiﬁcation to the superclass can cause the
malfunctioning of subclasses. It is not possible to identify fragility by analysing only

20 This is Java notation. C++ allows the same notation to be used but, for compatibility with C, it
accepts the expression at compile time without introducing dynamic checks. A cast with dynamic
checks would be written dynamic_cast<A*>(o) in C++.

10.3 Implementation Aspects

309

the superclass. It is necessary to consider the entire inheritance hierarchy, something
which is often impossible because whoever wrote the superclass generally does not
have access to all subclasses. The problem can arise for a number of reasons. Here,
we will only distinguish two main cases:

• The problem is architectural. Some subclass exploit aspects of the superclass’
implementation which have been modiﬁed in the new version. This is an extremely
important problem for software engineering. It can be limited by reducing the
inheritance relation in favour of the subtype relation.

• The problem is implementational. The malfunctioning of the subclass depends
only on how the abstract machine (and the compiler) has represented inheritance.
This case is sometimes referred to as the problem of fragile binary interface.

We are concerned here only with the second of these issues. A typical case shows
up in the context of separate compilation where a method is added to a superclass,
even if the new method interacts with nothing else. Starting from the following:

c l a s s U p p e r {
int x ;
int f ( ) { . . }

}
c l a s s L o w e r e x t e n d i n g U p p e r {

int y ;
int g (){ r e t u r n y + f ();}

}

the super class is modiﬁed as:

c l a s s U p p e r {
int x ;
int h (){ r e t u r n x ;}
int f ( ) { . . }

}

If inheritance is implemented as described in Sect. 10.3.2, the subclass Lower
(which is already compiled and linked to Super) stops to function correctly because
the offset used to access f has been changed, since it is determined statically. To
solve this problem it is necessary to recompile all the subclasses of the modiﬁed
classes, a solution which is not always easy to perform.

To obviate this question, it is necessary to compute dynamically the offset of
methods in the vtable (and also the offset of instance variables in the representation
of objects), in some reasonably efﬁcient manner. The next section describes one
possible solution.

10.3.3 Dynamic Method Dispatch in the JVM

In this section we present a simple description of the technique used by the Java virtual
machine (JVM), the abstract machine which interprets the intermediate (bytecode)

310

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

language generated by the standard Java compiler. For reasons of space, we cannot
go into the details of the JVM’s architecture; we note that it is a stack-based machine
(it does not have user-accessible registers and all operation operands are passed
on a stack contained in the activation record of the function that is currently being
executed). The JVM has modules for checking operation security. We limit ourselves
to discussing the broad outlines of the implementation of inheritance and method
dispatching.

In Java, the compilation of each class produces a ﬁle which the abstract machine
loads dynamically when the currently executing program refers to the class. This
ﬁle containing a table (the constant pool) for symbols used in the class itself. The
constant pool contains entries for instance variables, public and private methods,
methods and ﬁelds of other classes used in the body of methods, names of other
classes mentioned in the body of the class etc. With each instance variable and
method name is recorded information such as the class where the names are deﬁned
and their type. Every time that the source code uses the name, the intermediate code of
the JVM looks up the index of that name in the constant pool (to save space—it does
not look up the name itself). When, during execution, reference is made to a name
for the ﬁrst time (using its index), it is resolved using the information in the constant
pool, the necessary classes (for example the one in which the names are introduced)
are loaded, visibility checks are performed (for example the invoked method must
really exist in the class referring to it, is not a private, etc.); type checks are also
performed. At this point, the abstract machines saves a pointer to this information
so that the next time the same name is used, it is not necessary to perform resolution
a second time.

The representation of methods in a class descriptor can be thought of as being
analogous to that in the vtable.21 The table for a subclass starts with a copy of the
one for its superclass, where redeﬁned methods have their new deﬁnitions instead
of the old ones. Offsets, however, are not statically calculated. When a method is
to be executed, four main cases can be distinguished (which correspond for distinct
bytecode instructions):

1. The method is static. This is for a method associated with a class and not an

instance. No reference (explicit or implicit) can be made to this.
2. The method must be dispatched dynamically (a “virtual” method).
3. The method must be dispatched dynamically and is invoked using this (a “spe-

cial” method).

4. The method comes from an interface (that is from a completely abstract class

which provides no implementation—an “interface” method).

21 In reality, the speciﬁcation of the JVM does not prescribe any particular representation and limits
itself to requiring that the search for the method to be executed is semantically equivalent to the
dynamic search for the method name in the list of subclasses described above. The most common
implementation, however, is of a table that is very similar to the vtable.

10.3 Implementation Aspects

311

Ignoring the last case for the moment, the 3 other cases can be distinguished
primarily by the parameters passed to the method. In the ﬁrst case, only the parameters
named in the call are passed. In the second case, a reference is passed to the object on
which the method is called. In case 3, a reference to this is passed. Let us therefore
assume that we can invoke method m on object o as:

o . m (parameter )

Using the reference to o, the abstract machine accesses the constant pool of its
class and extracts the name of m. At this point, it looks up this name in the class’
vtable and determines its offset. The offset is saved in case of a future use of the
same method on the same object.

However the same method could also be invoked on other objects, possibly belong-
ing to subclasses of the one which o belongs to (e.g., a for loop in whose body a
call to m is repeated on all the objects in an array). To avoid calculating the offset
each time (which would be the same independent of the effective class of which the
method m is called on is an instance), the JVM interpreter uses a “code rewrite” tech-
nique. It substitutes for the standard lookup instruction generated by the compiler an
optimised form which takes as its argument the offset of the method in the vtable. In
order to ﬁx ideas (and simplifying a great deal), when translating the invocation of
a virtual method m, the compiler might generate the byte code instruction:

i n v o k e v i r t u a l index

where index is the index of the name m in the constant pool. During execution of
this instruction, the JVM interpreter calculates the offset d of m in its vtable and
replaces the instruction above with the following:

i n v o k e v i r t u a l _ q u i c k d np

Here, np is the number of the parameters that m expects (and which will be found
on the stack that is part of its activation record). Every time that the ﬂow of control
returns to this instruction, m is invoked without overhead.

There remains the case of the invocation of an interface method (that is, case 4
above). In this case, the offset might not be the same in 2 invocations of the same
method on objects in different classes. Consider the following situation (in which
we use Java syntax rather than pseudocode):

i n t e r f a c e I n t e r f a c e {

void foo ();

}
p u b l i c c l a s s A i m p l e m e n t s I n t e r f a c e {

int x ;
void foo ( ) { . . . }

}
p u b l i c c l a s s B i m p l e m e n t s I n t e r f a c e {

int y ;
int fie ( ) { . . . }
int foo ( ) { . . . }

}

312

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

Both A and B implement Interface and therefore are its subtypes. The offset

of foo is different in the two classes, though. Consider our usual loop:

I n t e r f a c e V [ 1 0 ] ;
...
for ( int i = 0; i <10; i = i +1)

V [ i ]. foo ();

At runtime, we do not know whether the objects contained in V will be instances of
A, B or some other class which implements Interface. The compiler could have
generated the JVM instruction for the body of loop:

i n v o k e i n t e r f a c e index, 0

(the 0 serves to ﬁll a byte that will be used in the “quick” version). It would not be
correct directly to replace this instruction by a “quick” version which returns only
the offset because changing the object could also change the class of which it is an
instance. What we can do is to save the offset but we cannot destroy the original
name of the method; we thus rewrite the instruction as:

i n v o k e i n t e r f a c e _ q u i c k nome_di_foo, d

Here name_of_foo is suitable information with which to reconstruct the name and
the signature of foo; d is the offset determined beforehand. When this instruction
is executed again, the interpreter accesses the vtable using the offset d and checks
that there is a method with the requested name and signature. In the positive case,
it is invoked; in the negative case, it searches for the method by name in the vtable,
(cid:2),
as it would were this the ﬁrst time it had been seen, and determines a new offset d
then writes this value in the code in place of d.

10.3.4 Multiple Inheritance

This section deals with multiple inheritance implementation in languages like C++,
where class descriptors follow the idea of a vtable. Let us recall that some languages
providing multiple inheritance (including Python) choose to implement dynamic
method lookup by a simple linear search over the (MRO linearisation of the) subclass
hierarchy (see Sect. 10.2.5).

The problems we deal here are of two orders: on the one hand, there is the prob-
lem of identifying how it is possible to adapt the vtable technique to handle method
calls; on the other (and the problem is more interesting and also has an impact on the
language) there is the need to determine what to do with the data present in the super-
classes. This will lead to two different interpretations of multiple inheritance, which
we can refer to as replicated and shared inheritance. We will take these problems
successively.

Vtable Structure

We will consider the example in Fig. 10.8. It is clear that is not possible to organise
the representation of an instance of C, nor a vtable for C in such a way that the initial
part coincides with the corresponding structure in both A and B.

10.3 Implementation Aspects

313

Fig. 10.8 An example of
multiple inheritance

In order to represent an instance of C, we may begin with the ﬁelds of A and
add then the ﬁelds of B. Finally, we need to list the ﬁelds speciﬁc to C (Fig. 10.9).
We know that, using the subtype relation, we can access an instance of C using a
static reference to any of the three types A, B and C. There are two distinct cases
corresponding to the two different views of an instance of C. If it is an access with a
static reference of type C or of type A, the technique described for simple inheritance
works perfectly (except that the static offsets of the real instance variables in C must
take into account the fact that the static variables belonging to B are in the middle).
When, on the other hand, an instance of C is seen as an object of B, it is necessary
to take into account the fact that the variables of B are not at the start of the record
but at a distance, d, from its start that is statically determined. When, therefore, we
access an instance of C through a reference with static type B, it is necessary to add
the constant, d, to the reference.

Similar problems arise for the structure of the vtable. A vtable for C is divided
into two distinct parts: the ﬁrst contains the methods of A (possibly as redeﬁnitions)
and the methods really belonging to C. A second part comprises the methods of B,
possibly with their redeﬁnitions. In the representation of an instance object of C,
there are two pointers to the vtable. Corresponding to the “view as A and C”, it will
have pointers to the vtable with methods from A and C. Corresponding to the “view
as B”, it will have pointers to the vtable with the methods of B (note that this is a
vtable for class C; the class B has another vtable, which is used for its own instances.
In general, every superclass of a class under multiple inheritance has its own special
part in the vtables of its subclasses). Invocation of a method belonging to C, or which

314

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

Fig. 10.9 Representation of objects and vtables for multiple inheritance

was redeﬁned or inherited from A, follows the same rules as simple inheritance. To
invoke a method inherited (or redeﬁned) from B, the compiler must take into account
that the pointer to the vtable for this method does not reside at the beginning of the
object but is displaced by d positions. In the example in the ﬁgure, to call the method
h of an instance of C seen as an object of type B (of which we have therefore a static
name, pb): add d to the reference pb; using an indirect access, obtain the address
of the start of the second vtable (that for B), then using the appropriate static offset
invoke method h. This call needs one additional operation (the ﬁrst add) in addition
to that required for simple inheritance.

We have, however, neglected the binding for this. Which current-object refer-
ence should we pass to the methods of C? If we are dealing with methods in the
ﬁrst vtable (to which access is performed using a this which points to the start
of the object, that is with the “A and B view”), it is necessary to pass the current
value of this. This would be wrong for methods in the second vtable (to which
access is performed using the pointer to this plus the offset d), however. We must
distinguish two cases:

• The method is inherited from B (the case of h in the ﬁgure). In such a case, it is
necessary to pass the view of the object through which we have found vtable.
• The method is redeﬁned in C (the case with g). In this case, the method might refer
to instance variables of A, and so it is necessary to pass it a view of the superclass.

The situation is awkward because dynamic method lookup requires that this cor-
rection of the value of this is done at runtime. The simplest solution is to store this
correction in the vtable, together with the name of the method. When the method is
invoked, this correction will be added to the current value of this. In our example,
the corrections are shown in Fig. 10.9 next to the name of the associated method. The
correction is added to the view of the object through which the vtable was found.

Overall, if we have a reference, pa, to a view of class C of some object, we can
compile a call to method h (which we can assume to be the nth in the vtable of B)
as follows (the address of a method and the correction each occupy w bytes):

10.3 Implementation Aspects

315

R1 := pa
R1 := R1 + d
R2 := *( R1 )
R3 := *( R2 + (n − 1) × 2 × w)
R2 := *( R2 + (n − 1) × 2 × w + w)
this := R1 + R2
call *( R3 )

// view A
// view B
// v t a b l e for B
// a d d r e s s of h
// c o r r e c t i o n

// call h

We have three instructions and an indirect access in addition to the sequence for
calling a method using single inheritance.

Replicated Multiple Inheritance

The previous section has dealt with the case in which a class inherits from two
superclasses. These superclasses, however, can themselves inherit from a common
superclass, producing a diamond, as we discussed in Sect. 10.2.5:

class Top {

int w ;
int f (){

r e t u r n w ;

}

}
class A e x t e n d i n g Top {

int x ;
int g (){

r e t u r n w + x ;

}

}
class B e x t e n d i n g Top {

int y ;
int f (){

r e t u r n w + y ;

}
int k (){

r e t u r n y ;

}

}
class B o t t o m e x t e n d i n g A , B {

int z ;
int h (){

r e t u r n z ;

}

}

The instances and the vtable for A have a initial part that is a copy of the structure
corresponding to Top. The same is the case for instances and the replicated vtable
for B. Under replicated multiple inheritance, Bottom is constructed using to the
approach we have already discussed, and therefore consists of two copies of the
instance variables and methods of Top, as shown in Fig. 10.10.

The implementation does not pose other problems in addition to those already
discussed. Name conﬂicts must be resolved explicitly (in particular it will not be
possible to invoke the method f of Top on an object of class Bottom, nor assign an

316

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

Fig. 10.10 Implementation of replicated multiple inheritance

instance of Bottom to a static reference of type Top, because we would not know
which of the two copies of Top to choose).

Shared Multiple Inheritance

Replicated multiple inheritance is not always the conceptual solution which a soft-
ware engineer has in mind when designing a diamond situation. When the class at
the bottom of the diagram contains a single copy of the class at the top, we speak of
shared multiple inheritance. In such a case both A and B possess their own copy of
Top, but Bottom has only one copy of it.

C++ allows shared inheritance using virtual base classes. When a class is deﬁned
as virtual, all of its subclasses always contain of a single copy of it, even if there
is more than one inheritance path, as there is in the case of the diamond. With this
mechanism, a class is declared virtual or nonvirtual once and for all. If we have a
non-virtual class and, later, we discover that we require inheritance with sharing,
there is nothing else to do but to rewrite the class and recompile the entire system.
Worse, a class is virtual for all its subclasses, even if in some cases we wish that it
were virtual for some and nonvirtual (that is replicated) for others. In such cases, it
is necessary to deﬁne two copies of the class, one virtual and the other non virtual.
With inheritance with sharing there is usually a name-conﬂict problem. The prob-
lem is solved in arbitrary ways by different languages. In C++, for example, in the
case of a virtual base class method that is redeﬁned in a subclass, it is required that
there is always a redeﬁnition that dominates all the others in the sense that it appears
in a class that is a subclass of all the other classes where this method is deﬁned. In our

10.3 Implementation Aspects

317

Fig. 10.11 Implementation of multiple inheritance with sharing

example, for method f, the dominant redeﬁnition is the one in class B. It is therefore
the one inherited by Bottom. If both of the classes A and B redeﬁne f, the deﬁni-
tions of these classes would be illegal in C++ because there would not be a dominant
redeﬁnition. Other languages allow inheriting classes to choose along which path
the method is to be inherited; alternatively, they permit a complete qualiﬁcation of
names so as explicitly to choose the desired method. As usual, when dealing with
multiple inheritance, there is no elegant solution that is clearly better than any other.
We now come to the implementation of the vtable for shared multiple inheritance.
In Fig. 10.11, the implementation used in C++ is depicted schematically. C++ is a
language in which a virtual class is shared by all of its subclasses. Since Bottom
contains a single copy of Top, it is no longer possible to represent sub- and superclass
in a contiguous way. To each class in the diamond there corresponds a speciﬁc view
of the object. Corresponding to each view, there is both a pointer to the corresponding
vtable, and a pointer to the shared part of the object. Access to instance variables and
methods of Bottom, A and B is the same as in the case of multiple inheritance without
sharing. To access instance variables, or to invoke a method of Top, a preliminary
indirect access instead is required (let us assume that f is the nth method of the
vtable for Top and every address is w bytes wide):

R1 := pa
R1 := *( R1 + w)
R2 := *( R1 )
R3 := *( R2 + (n − 1) × 2 × w)
R2 := *( R2 + (n − 1) × 2 × w + w)
this := R1 + R2
call *( R3 )

// view Bottom

// view Top
// v t a b l e for Top
// a d d r e s s of f
// c o r r e c t i o n

// call h

The value necessary to correct the value of this is the difference between the view
of the class in which the method is declared and the view of the class in which it is
redeﬁned.

Languages which allow more elaborate situations (for example, a single super-
class is replicated in some classes and shared in others) require more sophisticated
techniques that we cannot explain in this book.

318

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

10.4 Polymorphism and Generics

Having studied the characteristic aspects of the object-oriented paradigm and its
associated implementations, in this section we will discuss the concept of subtype,
in particular the relations between polymorphism and generics. We will begin the
discussion in a general fashion; later, we will go into detail on generics in Java.

10.4.1 Subtype Polymorphism

We introduced the concept of polymorphism in Sect. 8.8, where we also distinguished
between two radically different forms of it: overloading (or ad hoc polymorphism)
and universal polymorphism (where a single value has an inﬁnite number of different
types obtained by instantiating a general type scheme). We have also seen the concept
of subtype polymorphism: a value exhibits subtype polymorphism when it has an
inﬁnite number of different types which are obtained by instantiating a general type
scheme, substituting for some parameter the subtypes of an assigned type.

When a language has a structural notion of compatibility between types, it is clear
that there is a form of polymorphism, even though it is not as completely general
as universal parametric polymorphism. For the subtype relation, each instance of a
class A has, as type, all the superclasses of A. This property is particularly interesting
in the case of methods. Let us consider a method (for simplicity we will restrict the
discussion to a method with a single argument):

B foo ( A x ) { . . . }

By virtue of subtype compatibility, foo can receive as an argument a value of any
subclass of A. The code for foo does not need to be adapted to speciﬁc subclasses.
The structure of classes (and the associated implementations) ensure that an operation
that can be performed on values of type A can also be performed on values of its
subclasses. The reader will certainly recognize polymorphism here. We are dealing
with subtype polymorphism because it is not completely general but is limited to
subtypes of A.

We will use the symbol “<:” (introduced in Sect. 8.8) to denote the subtype
relation, and we read C<:D as “C sub D” (C is a subtype of D). We also use the
concept of universal quantiﬁcation introduced in the box on Sect. 8.7.2. With these
notations, we can write the type of method foo as:
∀T <: A . T - > B

which expresses the fact that this method can be applied to a value of any subclass
whatsoever of A. This is a form of implicit subtype polymorphism because instanti-
ation occurs automatically when the method is applied to a value of the subclass.

In reality, the notation that we are using is much more expressive than the pseudo-
language that we have used so far. Let us consider a very simple method that returns
its argument, of class A:

A Ide ( A x ){ r e t u r n x ;}

10.4 Polymorphism and Generics

319

From the semantic viewpoint, we can say that Ide has the type:
∀T <: A . T - > T

because it returns unaltered the object passed as its argument. However, assuming
that C<:A and that c is an instance of C, the following assignment would be rejected
by a static type checker:

C cc = Ide ( c );

notwithstanding the fact that it is perfectly sensible from a semantic viewpoint. The
point is that common languages have a type system that is incapable of recognizing
that ∀ T<:A.T->T is a correct typing for Ide (as the ML typing system would
do, see box on Sect. 8.7.4), nor do they have a linguistic mechanism with which the
programmer can express that the result type of a method depends on the argument
type. However, this argument guarantees that the dynamic correction with a downcast:

C cc = ( C ) Ide ( c );

will never cause runtime type errors.

The notation that we have used for types, in summary, allows us to express rela-
tionships between the type of the argument and the result type which are not possible
in our pseudo-language (nor in the fragment of C++ or Java that we have analysed
so far).

Before looking at a way in which the language can be extended, we give another,
more meaningful, example of this limited form of polymorphism which it is possible
through the tools we have developed so far. We want to implement a stack of elements
represented as a linked list. We do not immediately wish to ﬁx the type of the objects
that will appear in the list, so we declare them to be of type Object. Figure 10.12

Fig. 10.12 Stack class based
on Object

320

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

shows one possible deﬁnition for a Stack class which contains generic elements.
What interests us is that the pop method returns an Object (and can do nothing
else, given that we have not made any assumptions about the type of the stack’s
elements). Now we can use our stack, but we must exercise some care. Let C be any
class:

C c ;
S t a c k s = new S t a c k ();
s . push ( new C ());
c = s . pop ();

// type error

The last line is incorrect because we are seeking to assign an Object to a variable
of type C. It is it is necessary to force the assignment with a (dynamically checked)
cast:

c = ( C ) s . pop ();

// d y n a m i c c h e c k

After these examples, we may recall what we said in Sect. 8.2.1: languages usually
impose restrictions on types which are stricter than those which are semantically
reasonable, so that they can guarantee efﬁcient static checking. The next section,
however, will discuss language extensions that allow more powerful explicit subtype
polymorphism.

10.4.2 Generics in Java

In Sect. 8.7, we discussed the concept of the C++ template. A program fragment
where some types are indicated by parameters, which can then be appropriately
instantiated by “concrete” types. This leads to an interesting form of polymorphism.
Java introduces a similar concept (but with very different potential and implementa-
tion), giving it the name generic. This Java construct will be presented in this section
with the purpose of discussing its relationship with subtyping.

In Java, type deﬁnitions can be generic (that is, classes and interfaces can be
generic), as well as methods. The syntax used is similar to that in C++ and uses
angle brackets to denote parameters. Figure 10.13 shows the generic version of
Fig. 10.12. The type <A> is the formal type parameter of the generic declaration
and will have to be a instantiated later. A speciﬁc version of Stack is obtained by
specifying which types must be substituted for A. For example stacks of strings or
integers (Integer is a class which allows us to see an integer as an object and is
different from the type int, which is formed of ordinary integers):

Stack < String > ss = new Stack < String >();
Stack < Integer > si = new Stack < Integer >();

The types which are supplied as the actual parameters must be class or array
types.22 The dynamic cast which had to be added in the non-generic version is now
no longer necessary:

22 They must be reference types for implementation reasons that we have indicated on Sect. 8.7.4.

10.4 Polymorphism and Generics

321

Fig. 10.13 Classes for a generic stack

Fig. 10.14 Generic pairs

Stack < String > ss = new Stack < String >();
ss . push ( new S t r i n g ( " p i p p o " ));
S t r i n g s = ss . pop ();

Figure 10.14 shows another simple example, this time of pairs of elements of any

two types. A pair can obviously be instantiated by speciﬁc types:

I n t e g e r i = new I n t e g e r (3);
S t r i n g v = new S t r i n g ( " p i p p o " );
Pair < Integer , String > c = new Pair < Integer , String >(3 , v );
S t r i n g w = c . S e c o n d ();

Methods too can be generic. Let us assume, for example, that we wanted to deﬁne
a method for constructing diagonal pairs (that is with two identical components).

322

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

A ﬁrst attempt might be one using the subtype polymorphism already present in the
language, so we deﬁne:

Pair < Object , Object > d i a g o n a l ( O b j e c t x ){

r e t u r n new Pair < Object , Object >( x , x );

}

However, in a way similar to the pop method above, if we apply diagonal to

a string, the result is just a pair of Objects and not Strings:

Pair < Object , Object > co = d i a g o n a l ( v );
Pair < String , String > cs = d i a g o n a l ( v ); // c o m p i l a t i o n error

It is necessary to parameterise the deﬁnition of diagonal, in particular the type

of its result, as a function of the type of the argument:

<T > Pair < T , T > d i a g o n a l ( T x ){

r e t u r n new Pair < T , T >( x , x );
}

The ﬁrst pair of angle brackets introduces a type variable, the (formal) parameter to
be used in the deﬁnition of the method. The reader will have recognized that <T> is
a universal quantiﬁer written using a different notation. The deﬁnition states that
diagonal has type:
∀ T . T - > Coppia <T ,T >.

Our diagonal can also be used without explicit instantiation:

Pair < Integer , Integer > ci = d i a g o n a l ( new I n t e g e r ( 4 ) ) ;
Pair < String , String > cs = d i a g o n a l ( new S t r i n g ( " p i p p o " ));

The compiler performs a genuine type inference (Sect. 8.8), in general more
complex than the elementary one required in the example. In our case, it determines
that in the ﬁrst call T must be replaced by Integer, while in the second, by String.
An important aspect of the type parameters (either in the type or method deﬁnition)
is that they can have bounds. That is, they can specify that only a subtype of some
classes is permitted. Let us illustrate this feature using an example.

Assume we have available an interface for geometric shapes which can be drawn.

Then we have different speciﬁc classes which implements it:

i n t e r f a c e S h a p e {

void draw ();

}
c l a s s C i r c l e i m p l e m e n t s S h a p e {

...
p u b l i c v o i d draw ( ) { . . . . }

}
c l a s s R h o m b u s i m p l e m e n t s S h a p e {

...
p u b l i c v o i d draw ( ) { . . . . }

}

10.4 Polymorphism and Generics

323

Let us now make use of a standard Java library (java.util). We have a list
of shapes, that is objects of type List<Shape> and want to invoke the design
method on each element of the list. The ﬁrst idea will be to write23

void d r a w A l l ( List < Shape > f o r m s ){

for ( S h a p e f : f o r m s )

f . draw ();

}

The deﬁnition is correct, but the method can be applied only to arguments which
are of type List<Shape> (and not, for example, to List<Rhombus>). The
reason is that the type List<Rhombus> is not a subtype of List<Shape>, for
reasons that we will discuss shortly in Sect. 10.4.4.24

To obviate the problem, we can make the deﬁnition of the drawAll method
parametric. Clearly, we cannot allow as arguments an arbitrary list because it must
have to be composed of elements on which to call the draw method. The language
allows us to specify this fact in the following way:

< T e x t e n d s Shape > void d r a w A l l ( List <T > f o r m s ){

for ( S h a p e f : f o r m s )

f . draw ();

}

In this case, the formal type parameter is not an arbitrary type, but a type which
extends Shape (here “extends” is used as a synonym of “is a subtype of”; by this,
Shape extends itself). Using our notation of universal quantiﬁcation, the type of
drawAll becomes:
∀ T <: S h a p e . List <T > -> void

Now drawAll can be called on a list whose elements belong to any subtype of
Shape (Shape is obviously a subtype of itself):

List < Rhombus > lr = ...;
List < Shape > lf = ...;
d r a w A l l ( lr );
d r a w A l l ( lf );

The bound mechanism for type variables is fairly sophisticated and ﬂexible. In
particular, a type variable can appear in its own bound. We restrict ourselves to a
single example of this case, and we refer the reader to the bibliography for a deeper
discussion.25

23 The body the method is an example of a for-each (see Sect. 6.3.3), an iterative construct which
applies the body to all elements of the collection (list, array, etc.). In this case, for every f, in
forms, it calls the method draw.
24 For the moment,
if A<:B and
DefPara<T> is any parametric type deﬁnition (like List<T>), DefPara<A> and
DefPara<B> are unrelated in the subtype hierarchy.
25 The possibility that a type variable appears in its own bound is known in the literature as
F-bounded polymorphism and is used in particular for typing binary methods, that is methods
which have a parameter of the same type as the object which receives the method.

themselves by knowing that,

the reader must content

324

Wildcard

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

The drawAll method could be written in a more compact and elegant way using wildcards. The
“?” character (which is read “unknown”) stands for any type and can be used in generic deﬁnitions.
For example, a value of type List<?> is a list of elements whose type is unknown. It might
be thought that writing List<?> is the same thing as writing List<Object> but this is not
the case because List<Object> is not a supertype, for example, of List<Integer>, while
List<?> is really the supertype of all types List<A> for all A.

Using wildcards, the method drawAll could be written:

void d r a w A l l ( List <? e x t e n d s Shape > f o r m s ){

for ( S h a p e f : f o r m s )

f . draw ();

}

In general, every wildcard can be always replaced by an explicit parameter. From the pragmatic
viewpoint, for code clarity, a wildcard will be used where the parameter would be used only once
(as in the case of drawAll), while an explicit parameter should be used when the type variable
is used more than once (as in the case of diagonal, where the variable is used in the method’s
result type).

If two wildcards appear in the same construct, they must be considered distinct variables.

The elements of a class are comparable if the class implements the Comparable
interface. We want to deﬁne a method which, given a list of elements of generic type
as its argument, returns the maximum element of this list. What is the signature we
can give to this max method? A ﬁrst attempt is:

p u b l i c s t a t i c <T e x t e n d s C o m p a r a b l e < T > >

T max ( List < T > list )

This expresses the fact that the elements of the list must be comparable with
elements of the same type. We now try to use max. We have a type Foo which
allows us to compare objects:

c l a s s Foo i m p l e m e n t s C o m p a r a b l e < Object > { . . . }
List < Foo > cf = . . . . ;

We now invoke max(cf): each element in cf (is a Foo and therefore) is compa-
rable with any object, in particular with every Foo. But the compiler signals an error,
because Foo does not implement Comparable<Foo>. In reality it is sufﬁcient that
Foo is comparable with one of its own supertypes:

p u b l i c s t a t i c <T e x t e n d s C o m p a r a b l e <? s u p e r T > >

T max ( List < T > list )

Now, under the same conditions as before, Max(cf) is correct because Foo

implements Comparable<Object>.

10.4 Polymorphism and Generics

325

10.4.3 Implementation of Generics in Java

Unlike templates in C++, which are resolved at link time using code duplication
and specialisation, Java generics always exist in a single copy. In this way, the idea
in parametric polymorphism that there exists a single value (a single class, a single
method, etc.) which belongs to many different types (and, in the case of methods,
works uniformly on different types) is respected by the implementation.

Generics are implemented by the compiler using an erasure mechanism. A pro-
gram which contains generics is ﬁrst subjected to type checking. When this static
semantic checking has determined that everything is correct, the original pro-
gram is transformed into a similar one in which all generics have been removed.
All the information between angle brackets is eliminated (for example, every
List<Integer> becomes List). All the other uses of type variables are replaced
by the upper limit of the same variable (in general, this means Object). In the
end, if, after these transformations, the cancelled program is incorrect with respect
to types, appropriate (dynamic) casts are inserted. With this procedure, the use of
generics does not worsen the code (in the majority of cases), either in terms of size
or execution time. Perhaps more important are the other two consequences of this
implementation:

• The underlying abstract machine (the JVM) requires no modiﬁcation. The addition
of generics does not imply modiﬁcations that need to be implemented on different
architectures, but is localised to the compiler.

• It is possible to mix generic and non-generic code in a relatively simple way and,
above all, in a way that is safe. Possible holes in the static type system that might
be locally produced by the simultaneous use of generic and non-generic code will
be detected at runtime by the effect of the dynamic casts inserted by the compiler
during the erasure process.

10.4.4 Generics, Arrays and Subtype Hierarchy

We have already observed that in Java, a generic type deﬁnition DefPara<T> does
not preserve the subtype hierarchy. For any 2 types A and B, with A<:B,
DefPara<A> and DefPara<B> are not related in the subtype hierarchy. We want
now to clarify some of the reasons for this choice and we will consider the contrasting
behaviour that Java exhibits for arrays: if A<:B, A[] is a subtype of B[]! After
all, arrays are a primitive form of generic construct (the unique construct “array” is
specialised to arrays of speciﬁc type). Why do the two mechanisms behave in such
different ways?

We begin by discussing why generic deﬁnitions do not preserve subtypes. Let us
consider the following fragment which uses the generic deﬁnitions from Fig. 10.13:

Stack < Integer > si = new Stack < Integer >();
Stack < Object > so = si ;

// I n c o r r e c t in

Java

326

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

Let us assume, contrary to the facts, that generic deﬁnitions preserve types, that is
that Stack<Integer> <: Stack<Object>. The second line of the fragment
is now legal. We have two different references (and of different types) to a single
stack (integers). Let us continue our code:

so . push ( new S t r i n g ( " p l u t o " ));
I n t e g e r i = si . pop ();

// d a n g e r !

Under these hypotheses, both lines are type correct. Since so is a stack of Object,
we can store any object at all in it, for example a string. On the other hand, since si
is a stack of integers, by randomly selecting an element, an integer is obtained. But
this amounts to a clear violation of type security. Since the source of the problem
is that Stack<Integer> <: Stack<Object>, it is this relation that must be
abandoned. The type Stack<Object> is therefore not the common supertype of
all speciﬁc stacks Stack<A>. On the other hand, the pragmatics suggests that such
a supertype must exist in the language, because otherwise too many programming
examples would be difﬁcult, if not impossible, to write. It is for this reason that the
wildcard (“?”) was introduced. Stack<?> is the supertype of every speciﬁc stack.
The intuitive idea that A <: B implies that DefPara<A> <: DefPara<B>
is erroneous because it does not take into account the fact that collections can change
in time. Once a Stack<Integer> has become a Stack<Object>, it is no longer
possible to check statically that its modiﬁcations are consistent with its original
structure.

Now we come to the problem of arrays. If we substitute arrays for stacks in our

fragment of a few paragraphs ago, we obtain, mutatis mutandis:

I n t e g e r [] ai = new I n t e g e r [ 1 0 ] ;
O b j e c t [] ao = ai ;
ao [0] = new S t r i n g ( " p l u t o " );

// c o r r e c t : I n t e g e r [] <: O b j e c t []
// c o r r e c t ; e r r o r at r u n t i m e

The fragment is statically correct, because arrays in Java preserve subtypes (tech-
nically, it is said that they are a covariant construct), but the compiler, in order to
guarantee type security, is forced to insert dynamic type checks in cases like the last
line which, in the example, will cause a runtime error because we are trying to store
a string in a variable of type Integer.

Why then add covariant arrays to the language if they impose dynamic checks
which, however, remain counterintuitive in the light of the non-covariance of gener-
ics? The point is that covariant arrays allow some limited form of polymorphism.
Let us consider, for example, the problem of exchanging the ﬁrst two elements of an
arbitrary array. A possible solution is:

p u b l i c s w a p ( O b j e c t [] vect ){
if ( v e c t . l e n g t h > 1){

O b j e c t t e m p = vect [0];
vect [0] = vect [1];
vect [1] = temp ;

}

}

The method swap can be called on arbitrary arrays because of its covariance.

10.4 Polymorphism and Generics

327

Co- and Contra-variant Functions

Let D be a set on which a pre-order, written as ≤ (recall the box on Sect. 8.5.1), is deﬁned. A function
f : D → D is covariant when f respects the pre-order, that is x ≤ y implies that f (x) ≤ f (y). A
function is contravariant, whenever the pre-order is reversed, that is x ≤ y implies f (x) ≥ f (y).
If the relation is a partial order, the most common terminology in mathematics is that of
a monotone increasing function (for covariant) and anti-monotone, or monotone decreasing (for
contravariant). In the context of types and subtypes, the covariant-contravariant terminology is
always used (it is taken from category theory).

Covariant arrays were present in Java since the earliest days of the project, well
before designers considered the problem of generics. In retrospect however, in the
light of the introduction of generics, covariant arrays must be considered one of the
less successful aspects of the Java project.

10.4.5 Covariant and Contravariant Overriding

Let us conclude the study of the subtype relation by discussing the types permitted
in the redeﬁnition of methods. Java and C++ require that, when we have redeﬁnition,
the arguments to the redeﬁned method must be the same as those in the one being
redeﬁned. Let us take up again our pseudo-language and let C be a ﬁxed type. Given
a class such as:

c l a s s F {

C fie ( A p ) { . . . }

}

a subclass of F can redeﬁne (overwrite) fie only with a method which takes as its
argument an A. If the types are different, as for example in:

c l a s s G e x t e n d i n g F {

C fie ( B p ) { . . . }

}

we do not have redeﬁnition, but only the deﬁnition of two overloaded methods.

The same does not happen to the result type of the method. Both C++ and Java26
allow the type of the result of the method redeﬁned in subclass to be a subtype of the
corresponding type in the superclass. Let us assume that D is a subtype of C (D<:C):

c l a s s E e x t e n d i n g F {

D fie ( A p ) { . . . }

}

In E (which is a subtype of F: E<:F) the method fie is redeﬁned with respect
to F. The reader will have no difﬁculty convincing themselves on their own that this

26 Up to version 4, Java requires also that result types of a redeﬁned method must coincide with the
result type of the original method.

328

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

Fig. 10.15 An instance f of F and an instance g of G disguised as F

Fig. 10.16 Redeﬁnition of a
method: covariance of the
results type

extension is semantically legitimate and not the cause of type errors. We can however
help in this argument with some general considerations.

Supertypes and Views

In a language with subtype polymorphism, a type of an object can be interpreted as a
particular view of the object, or, in a more colourful way, as a disguise for the object.
Figure 10.15 represents this idea graphically in the case of two types G <: F (F is
a class of objects which contains the methods c1 and c2; the objects of G respond
to all the methods of F, plus c3 and c4).

If we apply this idea (which is informal, but which respects subtype semantics) to
the redeﬁnition of the method, we obtain the situation shown in Fig. 10.16, where our
method fie, which is deﬁned in F with the signature fie: A -> C, is redeﬁned
in a subclass with signature fie: A -> D. The ﬁgure immediately reveals that
this is correct with respect to types exactly when D<:C. In fact, the redeﬁned fie
produces a value of type D. If D<:C, this value is also a value of C and therefore the
types are respected.

We can summarise the discussion with a general principle: with respect to the
result type of a method, overriding is semantically correct (and permitted in many

10.4 Polymorphism and Generics

329

Fig. 10.17 Redeﬁnition of a
method: contravariance of
argument type

languages) when it is covariant. The result of the method that has been redeﬁned in
a subclass, is a subtype of the result of the original method.

This reasoning, however, can be easily applied also to argument types of methods.
The scheme in Fig. 10.16 can, in fact, be generalised to that in Fig. 10.17, where
method fie is redeﬁned with the signature fie: H->D. Which relation must be
valid between H and A so that the situation is semantically correct? The ﬁgure gives
an immediate answer: it must be A<:H. With the respect to the argument type of a
method, overloading is semantically correct when it is contravariant. The argument
of the redeﬁned method in the subclass, is a supertype of the argument of the original
method.

From the semantic viewpoint therefore, the type of the methods S->T is a subtype
(cid:2) (S->T<:S’->T’) whenever S<:S’ and T’<:T: the type of the methods
(cid:2)

of S
is covariant in the type of result and contravariant in the type of the arguments.

->T

Although semantically correct, contravariant overriding (of method arguments)
is counterintuitive in some situations. The most important cases are those of binary
methods, that is, methods with a parameter of the same type as the object which
receives the method. The typical case is that of an equivalence or comparison method.
Assuming we have a class such as the following:

c l a s s P o i n t {

...
b o o l e a n eq ( P o i n t p ) { . . . }

}

and we wish now to specialise it into the subclass:

c l a s s C o l o r e d P o i n t e x t e n d i n g P o i n t {

...
b o o l e a n eq ( C o l o r e d P o i n t p ) { . . . }

}

330

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

According to the contravariance rule, the ColoredPoint class is not a subclass
of Point because the argument of eq would be a subtype (and not a supertype) of
the type of the argument to eq in Point.

For these (and others) reasons, contravariant overriding is little used (one of the
few languages which use it is Emerald), while many of the most common languages
(with C++ and Java being the most common) require type identity for the argument.
There are however languages that would sacriﬁce static type security and only
use the rule of covariant overriding for method argument types (which is semanti-
cally incorrect). Among these are some fairly well-known language, such as Eiffel
and the language O2 (one of the most common object-oriented database systems).
The reason is assumed greater naturalness, especially for binary methods. Extended
experimentation with O2, amongst others, show that the semantic incorrectness of
type checking never causes problems in practice (that is in situations that are not
constructed ad hoc to violate the type system).

10.5 Summary

The chapter has been a general but deep, examination of the object-oriented parad-
igm, introduced as a way of obtaining abstractions in the most ﬂexible and extensible
way.

We have characterised the object-oriented paradigm when in the presence of:

• Encapsulation of data.
• A compatibility relation between types which we call subtype.
• A way to reuse code, which we refer to as inheritance and which can be divided

into single and multiple inheritance.

• Techniques for the dynamic dispatch of methods.

These four concepts were viewed principally in the context of languages based
on classes (even if we brieﬂy looked at languages based on delegation). We then
discussed the implementation of single and multiple inheritance and dynamic method
selection.

The chapter was concluded with a study of some aspects relevant to the type

systems in object oriented languages:

• Subtype polymorphism.
• Another form of parametric polymorphism which is possible when the language

admits generics (which we studied in Java).

• The problem of overriding of co- and contravariant methods.

The object-oriented paradigm, in addition to represent a speciﬁc class of lan-
guages, is also a general development method for system software codiﬁed by semi-
formal rules based on the organisation of concepts using objects and classes. Obvi-

10.7 Exercises

331

ously the two aspects, the linguistic and the methodological, are not completely
separate, given that the object-oriented development methodology ﬁnds its natu-
ral application in the use of object-oriented languages. However, within software
engineering, methodological aspects are usually treated in an autonomous fashion
without referring to any speciﬁc language. In this book, therefore, we did not go into
the methodological aspects of object-oriented programming (we refer the reader to
software engineering texts—see also the bibliographical notes below).

10.6 Bibliographical Notes

The ﬁrst object-oriented language was Simula 67 [1,2]. It is Smalltalk (which explic-
itly depends on Simula), however, which had the greatest inﬂuence on succeeding
languages and introduced the anthropomorphic metaphor of messages sent to objects
[3].

On C++ the canonical reference is [4]. The Java language deﬁnition can be found
in [5]; [6] is a more accessible text by one of the principal designer of the language.
An introduction to the Java Virtual Machine (and therefore to how the various mech-
anisms are implemented in Java) can be found in [7]. For the ofﬁcial speciﬁcation of
the JVM see [8].

Our description of the implementation of multiple inheritance is based on that of
C++ [9]. The introduction of generics into Java is the result of much research work
into subtype polymorphism. An introduction to generics as they appear in Java is to be
found in [10], which we have closely followed in our presentation. On foundational
aspects of subtype polymorphism, see [11].

For the Self project, see the original article [12]; the retrospective [13] is a good
source of information about the criteria for an innovative programming language
project. On covariant and contravariant overriding, see [14].

Finally, for object-oriented development methodologies see any general text on

software engineering [15].

10.7 Exercises

1. Consider the classes in Fig. 10.8 and the ﬁnal deﬁnition:

class E {

int v ;
void n ( ) { . . . }
}

class D e x t e n d i n g E , C {

int w ;
int g (){ r e t u r n x + y + v ;} // r e d e f i n i t i o n with r e s p e c t to C
void m ( ) { . . . }

}

332

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

Draw the representation for an instance object of D, as well as the structure of the
vtable for such a class, indicating for each method the appropriate value required
to correct the value of this.

2. Given the deﬁnitions in our pseudo-language:

a b s t r a c t c l a s s A {
int val = 1;
int foo ( int x );

}
a b s t r a c t c l a s s B e x t e n d i n g A {

int val = 2;

}
c l a s s C e x t e n d i n g B {

int n = 0;
int foo ( int x ){ r e t u r n x + val + n ;}

}
c l a s s D e x t e n d i n g C {

int n ;
D ( int v ){ n = v ;}
int foo ( int x ){ r e t u r n x + val + n ;}

}

Consider now the following program fragment

int u , v , w , z ;
A a ;
B b ;
C c ;
D d = new D (3);
a = d ;
b = d ;
c = d ;
u = a . foo (1);
v = b . foo (1);
w = c . foo (1);
z = d . foo (1);

Give the values of u, v, w and z at the end of execution.

3. Given the following Java deﬁnitions:

i n t e r f a c e A {

int val =1;
int foo ( int x );

}
i n t e r f a c e B {

int z =1;
int fie ( int y );

}
c l a s s C i m p l e m e n t s A , B {

int val = 2;
int z =2;
int n = 0;
p u b l i c

int foo ( int x ){ r e t u r n x + val + n ;}

10.7 Exercises

333

p u b l i c int fie ( int y ){ r e t u r n z + val + n ;}

}
c l a s s D e x t e n d s C {
int val =3;
int z =3;
int n =3;
p u b l i c int foo ( int x ){ r e t u r n x + val + n ;}
p u b l i c int fie ( int y ){ r e t u r n z + val + n ;}

}

Consider now the following program fragment:

int u , v , w , z ;
A a ;
B b ;
D d = new D ();
a = d ;
b = d ;
S y s t e m . out . p r i n t l n ( u = a . foo ( 1 ) ) ;
S y s t e m . out . p r i n t l n ( v = b . fie ( 1 ) ) ;
S y s t e m . out . p r i n t l n ( w = d . foo ( 1 ) ) ;
S y s t e m . out . p r i n t l n ( z = d . fie ( 1 ) ) ;

Give the values of u, v, w and z at the end of execution.

4. Is the following fragment of Java correct? In the positive case, the method fie

is redeﬁned (overridden)? What does it print?

c l a s s A {

int x = 4;
int fie ( A p ) { r e t u r n p . x ;}

}

c l a s s B e x t e n d s A {
int y = 6;
int fie ( B p ) { r e t u r n p . x + p . y ;}

}

p u b l i c c l a s s b i n m e t h {

p u b l i c s t a t i c void m a i n ( S t r i n g [] args ) {

B b = new B ();
A a = new A ();
int zz = a . fie ( a )+ b . fie ( a ) ;
S y s t e m . out . p r i n t ( zz );

}

}

334

References

10 Object-Oriented Paradigm

1. G. Birtwistle, O. Dahl, B. Myhrtag, K. Nygaard, Simula Begin (Auerbach Press, Philadelphia,

1973)

2. K. Nygaard, O. Dahl, The development of the SIMULA languages, in HOPL-1: The First ACM
SIGPLAN Conference on History of Programming Languages (ACM Press, New York, 1978),
pp. 245–272

3. A. Goldberg, D. Robson, Smalltalk-80: the Language and Its Implementation (Addison-Wesley

Longman Publishing Co., Inc, Boston, 1983)

4. B. Stroustrup, The C++ Programming Language, 4th edn. (Addison-Wesley Professional,

Boston, 2013)

5. J. Gosling, B. Joy, G. Steele, G. Bracha, The Java Language Speciﬁcation, 3/E (Addison
Wesley, 2005). The latest speciﬁcation available at the time of going to press is that of Java SE
19, www.docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/; accessed 14-February-2023

6. K. Arnold, J. Gosling, D. Holmes, The Java Programming Language, 4th edn. (Addison-Wesley

Professional, Boston, 2005)

7. J. Meyer, T. Downing, Java Virtual Machine (O’Reilly, 1997)
8. T. Lindholm, F. Yellin, The Java Virtual Machine Speciﬁcation, 2nd edn. (Sun and Addison-

Wesley, 1999)

9. B. Stroustrup, Multiple inheritance for C++, in Proceedings of the Spring 1987 European Unix

Users Group Conference (Helsinki, 1987)

10. G. Bracha, Generics in the Java programming language. Technical report, Sun Microsystems
(2004). www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/generics-tutorial-159168.pdf; accessed 14-
February-2023

11. L. Cardelli, S. Martini, J.C. Mitchell, A. Scedrov, An extension of system F with subtyping.

Inf. Comput. 109(1/2), 4–56 (1994)

12. D. Ungar, R.B. Smith, Self: the power of simplicity, in OOPSLA ’87: Conference Proceedings
on Object-Oriented Programming Systems, Languages and Applications (ACM Press, New
York, 1987), pp. 227–242

13. R.B. Smith, D. Ungar, Programming as an experience: the inspiration for self, in ECOOP ’95:
Proceedings of the 9th European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming (Springer,
Berlin, 1995), pp. 303–330

14. G. Castagna, Covariance and contravariance: conﬂict without a cause. ACM Trans. Progr. Lang.

Syst. 17(3), 431–447 (1995)

15. R.S. Pressman, B. Maxim, Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach, 8th edn.

(McGraw Hill, 2014)
