# Fuente
- archivo: 447-486.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/(Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science) Maurizio Gabbrielli_ Simone Martini - Programming Languages_ Principles and Paradigms (2nd Edition)-Springer (2023)/447-486.pdf
- extraido: 2026-04-27T21:01:41

# Contenido

Concurrent Programming

14

14.1 Threads and Processes

In the execution of a program, we can effectively visualise the ﬂow of control by
imagining a thread which, in the textual structure of the program, links all the com-
mands reached by the control according to the order given by the execution. A control
thread, or simply thread, identiﬁes the sequence of commands of a program executed
in a speciﬁc computation. In a sequential program only one thread is active at any
time of execution, while in a concurrent program there are several active threads.
Often, instead of threads, people talk about processes, tasks or concurrent programs,
although they consider the case where there are several contexts, of various granu-
larity, active at the same time. Also at the level of languages, the terminology is not
consistent, since some languages call processes what we have called threads, while
others (Ada for example) call them tasks.

Here, we will try to use a uniform terminology, and we will use the term thread with
the meaning seen above, while we will use the term process to indicate a generic
set of executing instructions, with its own address space, as it usually happens in
operating systems.1 According to this view, we can see a process as consisting
of several threads sharing resources (e.g., memory).2 Typically, operating systems
distinguish between heavyweight processes, which have their own address space,
from lightweight, which may share a common space. This terminology is sometimes
also used for threads; here we always consider lightweight threads.

1 Note that, in the ﬁeld of concurrency theory and the so-called “process algebras”, the term “process”
indicates an abstract computational entity, often identiﬁable with a real program.
2 Nonetheless, from the implementation standpoint, one can realise threads using primitives of the
kernel of the operating system to manage processes.

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
M. Gabbrielli and S. Martini, Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms,
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34144-1_14

433

434

14 Concurrent Programming

14.2 A Brief Historical Overview

Like many other important areas of computer science, concurrency arose from an
innovation in hardware architecture: the introduction, in the 1960s, of device con-
trollers. These are hardware mechanisms that allow peripheral devices to
autonomously manage the input and output of data, without the direct intervention
of the CPU. Before the advent of these devices, the management of peripherals was
extremely inefﬁcient: the CPU would send a command to the peripheral device to per-
form an input or output operation and then wait for the command to complete. Since
peripherals were (and are) devices with relatively longer operating times (than, e.g.,
memory registries), accessing peripherals meant a sensible amount of CPU cycles
wasted waiting for the peripheral to provide/emit some data (just think that a card
reader could read about four cards per second, while a computer already in the sixties
could execute about forty thousand instructions per second). Device controllers and
their communication mechanisms, based on interrupts, solved this inefﬁciency: now,
when the CPU wants to perform an input or output operation, it sends a command
to the appropriate device controller and then continues with the execution of other
instructions. As soon as the peripheral has ﬁnished executing, the controller signals
the CPU with an interrupt. The signal tells the CPU that the command it sent to
the peripheral terminated and there is some data available for it to process. Usually
(when possible), when the CPU receives these signals, it interrupts the execution of
the current instructions, and it deals with the signal through its associated interrupt
handler (which e.g., instructs the CPU on what to do with the data read from the
peripheral).

While interrupts made CPU-peripheral interactions concurrent and more efﬁcient,
they introduced new problems in programming, which, in turn, compelled researchers
to ﬁnd mechanisms to manage concurrency. In particular, concurrency can cause race
condition, i.e., situations that occur in the presence of access to shared data, when
the result of the computation may depend on the relative order of the operations. As
an example, imagine a program that performs some calculations using some data
from the disk. We would like our program to ask the peripheral to read the data
and, while this happens, it should continue to compute other values. However, we
cannot predict when the signal from the disk interrupts the computation: the interrupt
could stop the calculation after it loaded some values in memory, the interrupt han-
dler could overwrite those values, and, at the resumption, the program could operate
on the wrong set of data. In general, concurrency introduces the possibility for the
CPU to execute concurrent instructions in combinations of orderings that may result
in different execution results. To better see this, let us consider a simpler example
(although equivalent in meaning) of the CPU-peripheral scenario we drew above. In
our simpliﬁed example, we have two threads T 1 and T 2 in a program and they both
want to increment the value of a shared variable x, ﬁrst copying it from the central
memory to a registry. Without additional constraints on the ordering of execution
of T 1 and T 2, a valid execution is (preﬁxing each action with the thread that
executes it).

14.2 A Brief Historical Overview

435

T 1 | read x in reg1
T 2 | read x in reg2
T 2 | in c r e m e n t reg2
T 2 | w r i t e reg2 in x
T 1 | in c r e m e n t reg1
T 1 | w r i t e reg1 in x

What happened above is that T 1 sort of nulliﬁed the effect of T 2 on x. Let us say
that x contains the value 0. T 1 reads the value of x, which is 0. Then, also T 2 reads
the value 0 of x and it continues by incrementing it to 1 and writing the increment
in x. Finally, T 1 increments its reading of x to 1 and writes it in x. Of course, if we
had, e.g., T 1 and T 2 execute one after the other, x would hold the value 2, instead
of 1. Notably, the scenarios above are just two out of 20 admissible sequencing of
the instructions of T 1 and T 2, of which only two lead to x holding the value 2—the
cases in which T 1 or T 2 execute completely, followed by the complete execution of
the other thread.

As seen, reasoning on the behaviour of even small concurrent programs is hard,
due to the number of paths that the computation can follow. One way to make con-
current computations predictable is to introduce synchronisations among the various
operations. Indeed, the introduction and adoption of interrupts coincided with the
introduction of the ﬁrst tools for synchronisation and concurrency management,
such as critical sections and mechanisms for mutual exclusion. The ﬁrst multipro-
gramming systems, of the batch type, allowed very limited concurrency, essentially
only at the level of the operating system (one process ceded access to the CPU to
another one only on input and output operations). Subsequently, with the advent of
time-sharing systems, concurrent execution also appeared at the application level,
followed by the inclusion of constructs for communication and synchronisation in
high-level languages.

A second important impulse to the development of techniques and models for
concurrency came, at the end of the sixties, from the realisation of the ﬁrst mul-
tiprocessor architectures. The presence of several processors in these architectures
supports the simultaneous (or parallel) execution of different programs or even differ-
ent parts of the same program. This possibility posed new problems, both algorithmic
and methodological; in fact, parallel programming, developed mainly for scientiﬁc
computing applications, also involves ﬁelds other than those usually connected with
programming languages.

A third important element for the development of concurrent programming came
in the 1970s with the ﬁrst computer networks. The possibility to make different
machines, even far apart, “talk” to each other opened the way to another, different
model of concurrency: distributed computing, in which programs that run on differ-
ent machines can cooperate using mechanisms based on the exchange of messages
implemented by a suitable communication infrastructure.

436

14 Concurrent Programming

14.3 Types of Concurrent Programming

From the brief historical note above, it appears that we can distinguish various types
of concurrent programming.

For starters, we can distinguish physical concurrency from logical concurrency.
In the ﬁrst case, we have simultaneous, or parallel, execution of two threads (or pro-
cesses, or even programs), as, e.g., in the case of machines with several processors. In
the second case, we have concurrency only at the logical level, i.e., the programmer
and the software application perceive execution as concurrent but, physically, the
concurrent activities map into sequential executions. This is the case of users that
simultaneously use a machine with a single processor in multiprogramming. Con-
ceptually and through the lenses of programming languages, this distinction does not
have much relevance, except when considering system performance and execution
time—broadly speaking, if we have a sequential solution to a problem that runs in
Ts time units and a concurrent solution to the same problem that runs in Tp, with
physical concurrency we would have Tp < Ts.3

Parallel Programming

The type of programming that uses physical concurrency is usually referred as par-
allel programming and it involves dedicated algorithmic and methodological aspects
necessary to deﬁne an efﬁcient parallel solution to a problem. In this ﬁeld, we can
distinguish between data parallelism, where the main source of parallelism derives
from the application of the same operation to different data, and operation paral-
lelism, where we apply different operations in parallel to the same set of data. Both
types of parallelism have important practical applications, especially in the ﬁeld
of scientiﬁc computing, which employs speciﬁc multiprocessor architectures such
as vector processors. The typical applications of parallel programming concern the
solution of differential equations, such as those of weather models, where iterative
methods based on matrix calculations can be effectively parallelised to solve sys-
tems of equations. The division of the work between the various processors leads to
signiﬁcant increases in performance, provided that the algorithms and programming
methods used in the solution support load-balancing among the processors.

Although parallel programming introduces speciﬁc algorithmic and methodolog-
ical problems, from a linguistic point of view it does not pose problems particularly
different from those of logical concurrency. Indeed, a parallel program can use var-
ious underlying architectures, from multiprocessor machines with shared memory

3 How much less depends on many factors. In general, the performance increase, also called speed-
up, is given by the quantity Ts /Tp: if this is equal to n, we have a linear speed-up (also called
perfect), but the speed-up is frequently strictly less than n. There are also cases in which the speed-
up is greater than n (or superlinear): this happens, for example, if the computation needs a cache
much bigger than the one of a single processor, so that sequential performances are particularly
penalized with respect to concurrent ones.

14.3 Types of Concurrent Programming

437

to multicomputers4 or networks of computers with separate memory. For commu-
nication and synchronisation, one such program can use the same basic mechanisms
(shared memory and message exchange) that we see in the context of logical con-
currency and for this reason, in the following, we focus mainly on the latter.

In the context of logical concurrency, hereafter referred to simply as concurrency,
we distinguish between multithreaded programming and distributed programming.

Multithreaded Programming

We introduced the notion of multithreaded programming above and it concerns the
presence of more than one thread or process. Speciﬁcally, it entails more than one
context of execution active at the same time, in an application that runs on a single
machine—either a single processor or a shared-memory multiprocessor. The neces-
sity and usefulness of using concurrent threads and processes depends on the nature
of the problem the application has to solve. Let’s consider, for example, a modern
browser: when we follow a link to open a new page (and often a new window) the
program can open a new thread (or even a new process) whose tasks are to manage
the communication of packets related to the new page, to manage its formatting
and rendering (possibly opening new threads) and more. In the meantime, the user
can interact with other functions of the browser, without the risk that the execution
of slow operations (such as displaying images) could penalise the faster ones. Of
course, in single-processor machines, we need some implementation techniques to
avoid threads that idly occupy the CPU (for instance, waiting for the completion of
a slow operation) or for too long (preventing others to continue their computation).

Distributed Programming

The term distributed programming refers to the creation of concurrent programs
designed to run on machines made of distributed physical structures. These can be
multi-computers with distributed memory but also actual networks of computers of
various architectures and topologies. The important point, here, is that the nodes of
the computation system are physically distributed, they cannot share their memory,
and we must introduce appropriate mechanisms and communication primitives based
on message exchange. Chapter 15 is dedicated to deepening the discussion on this
last concurrency modality and its recent developments under the scope of languages.

Other Types of Concurrent Programming

A second axis along which we can distinguish various aspects of concurrent program-
ming concerns the granularity of the concurrent activities: these may be low-level
instructions, high-level language commands, parts of programs or entirely separate
programs.

4 For the sake of clarity. we use the term “multiprocessor” for machines with shared memory
and “multicomputer” for machines with distributed memory. The terminology in this ﬁeld is not
univocal, and there are many possible variations on the theme. For the present discussion, what is
important is the presence or absence of shared memory between different processors.

438

14 Concurrent Programming

The two extreme cases of this hierarchy are not particularly interesting for the pur-
poses of the present discussion, since they concern architectural issues and aspects
related to communication protocols rather than speciﬁc linguistic aspects. Also
single-command concurrency, although important in practice, is more concerned
with efﬁcient parallel compilation than with explicit concurrency management con-
structs. Indeed, in this type of concurrency we usually ﬁnd a traditional sequential
language extended with special annotations that inform the compiler on how to dis-
tribute data in memory, on how many processors to use and so on. The compiler, using
this information, produces an optimised parallel object code that can take advantage
of the features of the physical machine (typically multiprocessors with shared mem-
ory). An example of a language that allows this kind of parallel compilation is High
Performance Fortran (HPF), which is an extension of the Fortran 90 language,
proposed in the nineties, which allows obtaining programs with parallelism on data
and that is particularly used for scientiﬁc applications.

In this chapter, therefore, we focus on concurrency at the level of parts of programs,
be they subprograms, units, etc. Indeed, in this case, we need explicit high-level
linguistic constructs to manage the communication and synchronisation of the parts,
as we see in more detail in the next section.

A Note on Terminology

The following discussion, except for the speciﬁc case of Java, dealt with in Sect. 14.7,
makes no particular distinction between the case of threads and that of processes.
Hence, for the sake of simplicity and until Sect. 14.7, we use the term “process” as
a synonym of “thread”.

14.3.1 Communication Mechanisms

In the context of concurrent programming (regardless of the type), two common
aspects of different models and languages are the mechanisms of communication
and synchronisation.

The necessity of communication mechanisms is quite obvious: we need a way to let
the different activities that contribute to the realisation of some function communicate
with each other, to exchange information of various kinds (for example, partial results
of computations or control communications). In the mechanisms that consider two
communicating partners, we can identify two roles: the one who produces some
information and the one who receives it.5 Conceptually, we can identify two primary
communication mechanisms, depending on how the producer and receiver of the
communication are realised: those based on shared memory and those using message
exchange. These two types actually identify different classes of concurrency models
that we analyse in detail in Sects. 14.4 and 14.5. Here we are only interested in
mentioning their basic characteristics.

5 In the ﬁeld of communication theory, these two partners are usually called sender and receiver;
however here, for uniformity with current terminology, we reserve these terms only for the model
with message exchange.

14.3 Types of Concurrent Programming

439

Blackboard

A communication model somewhat intermediate between shared memory and message exchange
is the one based on the blackboard architecture (or shared store). There, separate processes, which
may have their own private memory space, share a memory area, called blackboard (or store), and
use it for communication. The best-known model in this ﬁeld is the Linda language model, where the
blackboard is dubbed tuple space and it is an abstraction of an associative memory shared among the
processes. The processes communicate with each other using appropriate communication primitives
to send/receive messages to/from the tuple space. Hence, even if it uses message exchange, the
communication is indirect and mediated by shared memory. This model, studied in the context of
the so-called “coordination languages”, although interesting, is less relevant than the other two and
omitted in this text.

Communication with Shared Memory

This kind of communication is what we have already seen in other parts of this book
and is typical of the imperative paradigm: two parts of the same program, that have
access to the same shared variable, can communicate simply by writing to the variable
and reading its value. More generally, in the shared-memory concurrent programming
model, the two partners, for example, two different processes, have access to the same
memory space where they can write and read values. This memory space can be
shared with more than one partner, thus allowing broadcast communications where
the same information produced is received by more than one partner.

Communication with Message Exchange

According to this communication model, the partners do not share any memory
space: to communicate, the sender must explicitly perform a send operation, while,
in a dual way, the receiver must perform an explicit receive operation. Moreover,
both the sender and the receiver should be able to access an appropriate communica-
tion structure, usually called a channel, to provide a path that, at least from the logical
point of view, connects the two partners. The implementation of this structure, as
well as that of send and receive operations, can be the most varied and can depend
both on the abstraction level of the communication operation and the underlying
hardware structure. It is worth remembering that, in principle, the communication
mechanisms of the physical machine and those of the language implemented on it
can be different. For example, it is possible that a program that was written in a
language that implements communication with message exchange runs on a mul-
tiprocessor machine that uses shared memory to simulate the channels and realise
send and receive operations. Similarly, it is possible, at least in principle, to run
programs written in a language that uses shared-memory communication on a mul-
ticomputer with distributed memory and hardware-level communication based on
message exchange.

440

14 Concurrent Programming

14.3.2 Synchronisation Mechanisms

The second fundamental aspect of the existing models of concurrency concerns the
employed synchronisation mechanisms. These mechanisms allow one to control the
relative order of the activities in the different processes and they are essential to ensure
the correctness of the computation. In the context of shared memory communication,
this aspect is evident, and synchronisation mechanisms are present in an explicit way.
Let us consider, for example, the case of two processes that communicate using a
shared variable x: of course, the receiving process must retrieve the value of x only
after the producing process has written the correct value in x. More in general, in
concurrent programming with shared memory, we ﬁnd two types of synchronisation:
mutual exclusion, which guarantees that certain critical regions of the code are not
accessible to several processes at the same time, and condition synchronisation,
which allows suspending the execution of a process until an appropriate condition
occurs.

These two types of synchronisation are realised using busy waiting (also known
as spinning) and the block (also known as scheduler-based synchronisation). In the
former, the waiting process actively uses the CPU by executing a cycle in which
it continuously tests a condition. In the second one, the process that has to wait
releases the CPU, so that it can be used by others. The scheduler will then reactivate
the process when the waiting condition will be veriﬁed. Various mechanisms allow
this kind of synchronisation, in particular semaphores and monitors. We see all these
techniques in detail in Sect. 14.4.

Synchronisation mechanisms are also present in the context of message exchange
communication, however, these are usually implicit in the deﬁnition of the send
and receive primitives. Indeed, before receiving a message, the latter must have
been sent. The receive primitive may directly implement this synchronisation,
for example, by suspending the activity of the process until the message has been
sent, without the need for any further explicit construct. Considering the type of
synchronisation performed in the send and receive primitives, we can identify two
communication mechanisms: a synchronous and an asynchronous one, which we
discuss below.

Asynchronous Communication

In this type of communication, the sending and receiving of a message take place
at different times, as in the case of e-mail. The sender performs a send operation
and then proceeds with the computation without waiting for the recipient to perform
the corresponding receive operation. In this case, the send operation is said
to be non-blocking. The receive operation, on the other hand, is blocking: the
recipient process is blocked after performing a receive and waits for the sender to
perform the send operation—the receiver can continue the computation only after
this has been done. Asynchronous communication presents some difﬁculties in the
implementation of channels, since they can, in principle, contain an arbitrary number
of messages sent and not yet received.

14.4 Shared Memory

441

Synchronous Communication

In the case of synchronous communication, this happens only when both the sender
and the receiver are ready to communicate using a speciﬁc channel, as with a tele-
phone call (without the use of an answering machine). Conceptually, in synchronous
communication, the send and the receive are done at the same time. In prac-
tice, the operations occur at different times, meaning that the sender, after having
performed a send operation, can continue with its computation only after the recipi-
ent performed the complementary receive operation. The recipient behaves in the
same way as in the case of asynchronous communication. In the case of synchronous
communication, both the send and the receive are blocking. The implementation
of synchronous communication may use a limited-size buffer to realise the commu-
nication channel, since a new message cannot be sent until the previous one has been
received.

We would like to draw the reader’s attention not to misunderstand the above ter-
minology, which refers to communication mechanisms and not to execution mech-
anisms. If we consider the latter, the languages that we discuss in this chapter are
all asynchronous, in the sense that each process, thread, task or program is executed
at its own speed (of course, depending also on the particular underlying processor)
without this being directly linked to that of other processes. Indeed, there exist syn-
chronous languages and models, where the execution times of different processes can
be synchronised—either because of the type of architecture used or because of the
assumptions made on the abstract model of computation employed. These languages
are of considerable interest in real-time and embedded systems, but their discussion
is beyond the scope of this chapter.

14.4 Shared Memory

In this section, we examine the synchronisation mechanisms used in concurrent pro-
gramming models based on shared memory. As mentioned, this mechanism supports
communication between two or more partners by letting them access the same shared
memory area which, for simplicity, we identify as a variable. For the communication
to be correct, we need speciﬁc synchronisation techniques to avoid race conditions
and other incorrect situations. As seen in Sect. 14.3.1, the two main forms of syn-
chronisation for shared memory are mutual exclusion and condition synchronisation.
Mutual exclusion allows multiple processes to execute simultaneously the sections of
code that access shared resources—the so-called critical sections. In this way, entire
sections of code can be considered atomic in terms of execution. Condition synchro-
nisation, on the other hand, allows one to suspend the execution of a process until an

442

14 Concurrent Programming

appropriate condition occurs, such as a variable that assumes a certain value.6 These
two types of synchronisation are achieved using two techniques: busy waiting (also
known as spinning) and block (also called scheduler-based synchronisation).

14.4.1 Busy Waiting

In busy waiting, the process that has to wait its turn (to enter a critical section or a
given condition has occurred) executes a cycle in which it continuously evaluates a
condition until it becomes true. During the wait, the CPU is actively employed, hence,
using this technique on a uniprocessor machine to synchronise different processes
does not make much sense, since it is wasteful to occupy the CPU idly waiting for a
condition to occur (e.g., emptying a buffer) that results from another process using
the same CPU. On the other hand, it is an efﬁcient technique if used on multipro-
cessor machines (or even if used at the hardware level, for example, to synchronise
data transfer on buses and local networks). Various synchronisation mechanisms use
active waiting: the most important is the lock (to realise mutual exclusion) and the
barrier (to realise condition synchronisation). Let us see both of them.

Locks

First, to realize a mutual exclusion mechanism, we need to make it clear which atomic
instructions are available to us, that is, which are the instructions whose indivisibility
is guaranteed by the underlying machine. Usually, at the hardware level, there is an
atomic instruction test_and_set( B ) that returns the value of the Boolean
variable B and then, atomically, i.e., in a non-interruptible way, it assigns the value
true to that variable. Using such instruction we can realize mutual exclusion as
follows.

Suppose that each process that wants to access the critical section has the following

structure (as usual, we use our pseudo-language quite freely here):

p r o c e s s Pi {

non - c r i t i c a l s e c t i o n ;
a c q u i r e _ l o c k ( B );
c r i t i c a l s e c t i o n ;
r e l e a s e _ l o c k ( B );
non - c r i t i c a l s e c t i o n ;

}

The critical section, as already mentioned, encloses the shared data structures for
which we want to guarantee mutual exclusion, that is, for which we want to prevent
concurrent accesses. Let us also assume that the shared variable B, of type Boolean,
is initialized to false:

bool B = f a l s e ;

6 Mutual exclusion might seem a special case of condition synchronisation where the condition is:
“no other process is in a critical section”. This, however, would assume control over the global state
of the system, which is not usually the case in condition synchronisation.

14.4 Shared Memory

443

This variable realizes the so-called lock, that is, the lock to be used to access the
critical section. Thus, using the instruction test_and_set( B ), we can deﬁne
the lock acquisition and release functions as follows:

void a c q u i r e _ l o c k ( ref B : bool ) {

w h i l e t e s t _ a n d _ s e t ( B ) do { skip ; }

}

void r e l e a s e _ l o c k ( ref B : bool ) {

B = f a l s e ;

}

(skip, above, is the command that produces no effect, included in the example only
for clarity of exposition). The procedure for lock acquisition consists of a loop (also
called spin, hence the term spin lock for this technique) where we test the shared
variable B until it has value false, denoting the possibility to access the critical
section. The test is done in the same atomic action that assigns to B the value true,
such that only one among several tests tried simultaneously (by multiple processes)
is successful. This implies that only one among the several processes executing
acquire_lock( B ) can succeed in accessing the critical section, thanks to the
atomicity of the operation of test_and_set, which guarantees mutual exclusion.
Note that this mechanism also ensures that one, out of the many processes that
are trying to enter the critical section, succeeds in doing so, i.e., there is always at
least one process that is able to progress (the one entering the critical section). In
other words, with this conﬁguration, we can guarantee the absence of deadlocks.
Unfortunately, the previous implementation of mutual exclusion presents a serious
efﬁciency problem on multiprocessor machines. The processes attempting to access
the critical section, keep performing write operations to the shared variable each time
they execute the test_and_set operation within the while loop. Such operations,
performed atomically along with testing the value of the variable, cause contention
for memory and bus usage that eventually degrades system performance.

To avoid this problem, one can resort to the test and test_and_set technique.
Instead of performing a test_and_set operation on the shared variable, resulting
in a write, we only perform the test (read) operation in each cycle. When that operation
is successful, we then switch to the test_and_set to actually gain access to the
critical section. According to this technique, the lock acquisition function is realized
as follows (release occurs as before):

void a c q u i r e _ l o c k ( ref B : bool ) {

w h i l e B do { skip ; }
w h i l e t e s t _ a n d _ s e t ( B ) do {

w h i l e B do { skip ; }

}

}

Both this and the previous implementation of mutual exclusion present an addi-
tional problem. There is no guarantee that a process that wants to access the critical
section sooner or later will succeed in doing so. Indeed, it may be the case that, when
the critical section is released, there is always another process that manages to access
it ﬁrst. This is because we make no assumptions about the management of processes
and, in particular, their scheduler. Although, in practice, such behaviour seems quite

444

14 Concurrent Programming

unlikely, there are speciﬁc algorithms that ensure that a process waiting to access the
critical section, or more generally waiting to proceed, will sooner or later succeed in
doing so. These properties are called “fairness” and their precise deﬁnition is beyond
the scope of our treatment (there are different notions of fairness, and in some cases
the differences are subtle). Here, we settle for an intuitive use of this term: assum-
ing that there are multiple claimants for a common resource, a policy for managing
access to the resource is (weakly) fair if every claimant who is enabled to access
it inﬁnitely many times succeeds in accessing the resource. We can achieve a fair
solution for mutual exclusion by following the idea that, in the case where multiple
processes are competing for access to the critical section, we can establish shifts
among these. An algorithm that implements this idea in an intuitively simple way is
that of ticket machines—the ones found in many places to manage customer access
to a counter. We give a dispenser of numbers (tickets), sorted in ascending order,
to customers, and we grant access to the resource, in mutual exclusion, following
that order. A limitation of this algorithm is that the values grow in an unlimited way,
at least in principle. Specialised literature includes examples of algorithms that can
avoid this unlimited growth, like the tie-breaker.

Barriers

Barriers are a condition synchronisation mechanism typically used in parallel pro-
gramming, where we often have algorithms implemented by n different processes
that concur to produce the ﬁnal solution using iterative methods (e.g., matrix manip-
ulation). At the end of each iteration, each process must wait for the completion of
the activities of all other processes before moving on to the next iteration. This can be
achieved by introducing a synchronisation point in the code, called a barrier, where
each process waits for a global condition to occur before proceeding. Each process
Pi, with i = 1 . . . n, will therefore have a pattern of this type

p r o c e s s Pi

{

w h i l e B true do {
code of task i ;
wait for all other Pj to t e r m i n a t e ;
// b a r r i e r

}

}

To realise the wait, and thus the barrier, we can use a global counter, initialised
at zero before the cycle, which each process increments at the end of its task and on
which it expects the value n to be reached. The access operations to the counter must
be done atomically and the waiting can be active.

There are many ways, even quite sophisticated, of realising barriers. As they are

quite speciﬁc to parallel programming, we do not consider them further here.

14.4 Shared Memory

445

14.4.2 Scheduler-Based Synchronisation

The active waiting mechanisms seen in the previous section have several drawbacks.
First, there are normally more processes than processors, so it is not convenient to
use CPU time to perform an active wait for one process, while other processes are
waiting to use the CPU.7

Furthermore, the variables used for synchronisation in our examples, as well as in
practice, are “normal” variables and not structured in a speciﬁc data type or in some
linguistic construct for this purpose. As we have learned from our discussion on data
types and objects, if we want to minimise the probability of making programming
errors, we should strive to keep concerns separated, e.g., syntactically or via the type
system.

Scheduler-based synchronisation mechanisms, also called block-based mecha-
nisms, have been introduced to deal with the above problem. In scheduler-based
synchronisation, when we put on hold a process, we associate the event that the
process is waiting for with information that identiﬁes the process itself. When the
event occurs, the scheduler knows that the processes associated with that event are
ready for execution. These synchronisation mechanisms usually provide variables
that can take speciﬁc values and support speciﬁc operations on those values for syn-
chronisation. Thus, we can see them, at least at the conceptual level, as data types,
although they rarely appear explicitly as constructs in high-level languages.

In the following, we look at the two main mechanisms of this type, i.e., semaphores
and monitors, which support both mutual exclusion and condition synchronisation.

Semaphores

The mechanism based on semaphores, introduced by Dijkstra in the 1960s, was
the ﬁrst explicit synchronisation tool for shared-memory systems and remains to
this day one of the most important synchronisation constructs implemented at the
core operating system level. Already present in ALGOL 68, semaphores are used in
almost all libraries for concurrent programming and also appear in some languages,
such as SR and Modula-3.

As its name suggests, we can see a semaphore as a construct that regulates the
“trafﬁc” of processes to avoid “collisions”. This is similar to the namesake device that
regulates trafﬁc on railway lines, where a colour of a dedicated semaphore indicates
whether a track section is free, and therefore allows or forbids access to trains. The
colour of a semaphore is manipulated by speciﬁc operations when a train occupies
(from green to red) or releases (from red to green) the track section.8

7 An exception to this principle occurs when the active wait time is less than the time required to
make the context switch needed to execute another process.
8 Here, we consider the simpliﬁed, binary version of the train being or not in the track section and
avoid the complexity of having a third colour, usually yellow, that indicates to other trains that
another train is leaving/entering the section.

446

14 Concurrent Programming

The metaphor translates into semaphores being the data type whose values (corre-
sponding to the colours) determine the access to sections of the program by processes.
Our semaphore data type, which we call sem, is made of:

• the set of values, consisting of the integers ≥ 0;
• two atomic operations called P and V.9

A variable s of type semaphore, declared as usual with

sem s

provides a shared structure that supports synchronisation between processes based
on the value of s, by means of the two operations P and V where, intuitively, P gives
access to the semaphore and V releases the semaphore.

More in detail, if a process Pr performs the operation

P ( s )
the effect is as follows. If the value of s is > 0, then s is decremented and the
operation terminates, so the process can continue with the execution of the code
following P( s ) (i.e., accessing the critical section). Alternatively, if the variable
s has value 0, then the operation itself (and process Pr by extension) blocks until s
takes value > 0. This blocking is usually handled at the level of the operating system
kernel. This means that the process Pr put on hold releases the CPU, which others
can use, and the operating system “awakens” it with the signalling of the event that
the variable s has a value > 0.10 As mentioned, these operations using P( s )
must be thought of as being performed in a single atomic action. This means that,
for example, if the value of s is 1 and two processes are performing an operation
P( s ), only one of the operations executes, entering the critical section, while the
other blocks.

The operation

V ( s )

allows one to signal that the resource that had been committed to a P( s ) is now
free. To do this, V( s ) increments, in a single atomic operation, the value of s.
The process that executes V( s ) never blocks.

When the variable s can only assume values 0 and 1, we speak of a binary

semaphore. When s can take non-negative values, we have a generic semaphore.

The “awakening” of the blocked P operations is normally handled by the process
scheduler. Thus, the fairness of handling these operations, and the fairness of the

9 The names of these two operations come from Dutch, Dijkstra’s native language, and correspond
to the initials of “verhogen” (V) meaning “increase” and “prolaag” (P). This second word is not
actual Dutch but the abbreviation of “probeer te verlagen” (“attempt to reduce” or “attempt to
decrease”). The abbrevation was invented by Dijkstra because also “decrement” begins with V in
Dutch (“verlagen”) and he wanted one-word commands related to mnemonic correspondents.
10 In principle, semaphores could be implemented using active wait as well (at least on a multipro-
cessor machine). However, semaphores are usually implemented as mentioned above, hence the
choice to put them in this paragraph.

14.4 Shared Memory

Fig. 14.1 The dining
philosophers problem

447

access of processes into critical sections, depends on the fairness assumptions of
the scheduler itself. Normally, semaphore implementations ensure that the queue
of blocked processes waiting for the completion of an operation P is managed in
a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) manner: the ﬁrst blocked processes are the ﬁrst to be
woken up. Thus, if there are enough operations V, fairness is guaranteed.

As an example of the use of semaphores, let us see the problem of the dining
philosophers, a classic synchronisation problem due to Dijkstra. Five philosophers
sit at a round table, as shown in Fig. 14.1. Each philosopher alternates between the
activities of eating and thinking. Each philosopher can only use the forks placed at
the sides of his plate, and each philosopher needs two forks to eat.11 Since there
are as many forks as there are philosophers, if each philosopher takes only one
fork (e.g., the one on the right of the plate) no one can eat. This is an example of a
deadlock situation. Each process (philosopher) must wait for the release of a resource
(fork) by another process to proceed, but since the chain of release dependency is
a cycle, no one can proceed. Hence, to avoid deadlock situations in this scenario,
we need to avoid the circular wait (the ﬁrst process waiting for the second which
waits for the third and so on until the ﬁrst again). We can achieve this, for example,
by assuming that the ﬁrst philosopher chooses the right fork ﬁrst and then the left
one, while all the others take the left fork ﬁrst and then the right one. A solution to
this synchronisation problem is therefore as follows. Let us assume that we have a
forks array of 5 semaphores, one for each fork, which we all initialise to 1. We
also denote with philosopher[i] the generic i-th philosopher (with i ∈ [0, 4]

11 The traditional justiﬁcation for using two forks is that the plate contains spaghetti, which are
notoriously difﬁcult to handle with only one fork by non-Italian philosophers.

448

14 Concurrent Programming

by analogy with the indices of the array: fork number i is the one to the right of
philosopher i). The selection of a fork is realised by the operation P while the release
happens via the operation V.

sem [] forks [5];
for ( i = 0 , i < 5 , i += 1 ) { f o r k s [ i ] = 1; }

p r o c e s s Philosopher( i ){

sem f i r s t _ f o r k , s e c o n d _ f o r k ;
if ( i == 0 ){
= f o r k s [ 4 ];
f i r s t _ f o r k
s e c o n d _ f o r k = f o r k s [ 0 ];

} else {

// the one on the r i g h t
// the one on the left

f i r s t _ f o r k
s e c o n d _ f o r k = f o r k s [ i -1 ]; // the one on the r i g h t

// the one on the left

= f o r k s [ i ];

}
while true {

t h i n k ;
P ( f i r s t _ f o r k );
P ( s e c o n d _ f o r k ); // a c q u i r e s e c o n d
eat ;
V ( f i r s t _ f o r k );
V ( s e c o n d _ f o r k ); // r e l e a s e s e c o n d

// r e l e a s e f i r s t

// a c q u i r e f i r s t

}

}

Philosopher(0) (cid:4) Philosopher(1) (cid:4) Philosopher(2) (cid:4) Philosopher(3) (cid:4) Philosopher(4)

let us unfold one of

the possible executions. We start

The last line of code indicates the concurrent execution of the processes corre-
sponding to the ﬁve philosophers. Proving the correctness of the solution is trivial.
Indeed,
from
Philosopher( 1 ), who takes his ﬁrst fork (the one on his left) forks[1],
followed by Philosopher( 2 ), who takes forks[2] (also on his left) and
so on until Philosopher( 4 ), who takes forks[4] (on his left). Now it
is the turn of Philosopher( 0 ) to take his ﬁrst fork. However, instead of
completing the cycle (of left-ﬁrst acquisitions, which would end in a deadlock),
Philosopher( 0 ) tries to acquire the fork on his right. This is forks[4],
which was already acquired by Philosopher( 4 ). The only thing that
Philosopher( 0 ) can do is to wait for that fork to become available, allowing
the other philosophers to pick their second (right)
fork (Philosopher
( 1 ) would pick forks[0], Philosopher( 2 ) forks[1] and so on,
until Philosopher( 4 )). When Philosopher( 4 ) and Philosopher
( 1 ) release their forks, Philosopher( 0 ) will ﬁnally have the chance to
pick his forks (right ﬁrst, left second) and eat his well-deserved meal. We discuss
more in depth on the operator (cid:4) in Sect. 14.6.1.

Monitors

In the previous chapters, we saw how abstraction mechanisms play an important
role also in the context of data structures. In particular, we have analysed in detail
the basic idea of abstract data types ﬁrst, and then of objects, trying to understand
why it is important to be able to provide constructs that encapsulate both the abstract
representation of a datum and the operations possible on it. From this point of view,

14.4 Shared Memory

449

semaphores are deﬁcient, since they are low-level constructs that do not offer sufﬁ-
cient structuring and abstraction mechanisms. In fact, a semaphore is essentially a
variable shared by several processes, and it is the task of the programmer to ensure
that this variable is used correctly, using P and V, with all the consequent risks on
correctness (use of the wrong semaphore, omission of a P or V, use of operations
other than P and V, etc.). Notice also that semaphores can work both to implement
mutual exclusion and condition synchronisation. This is not completely satisfactory,
since the two concepts are different and, to help developers understand a program,
it would be good if this diversity also appeared at a linguistic level.

To overcome these shortcomings, the 1970s saw the introduction of the monitors,
also initially proposed by Dijkstra, subsequently developed by Brinch Hansen and
C.A.R. Hoare, and later used in many programming languages, including Java. A
monitor is an abstract data type that encapsulates the representation of an abstract
object with state and provides permitted operations to act on that object. More pre-
cisely, a monitor contains permanent variables, representing the state of the object,
procedures, to act on these variables, and initialisation commands, used when the
monitor is created.

Without referring to any speciﬁc language, we can represent a monitor declaration

as a data type with the following structure

m o n i t o r M o n i t o r N a m e {

v a r i a b i l e s ;
i n i t i a l i s a t i o n c o m m a n d s ;
p r o c e d u r e s ;

}

Permanent variables exist as long as the monitor exists (of course, procedures
may have their own local variables that have a shorter lifespan). Among them there
are certain variables known as condition variables that, as we shall see, allow con-
dition synchronisation. Outside the monitor, only the procedure names (with their
signatures) are visible, which are therefore the only operations that can be used by
(external) processes to act on the permanent variables, similarly to what happens
with the ﬁelds of objects deﬁned with a private visibility. Permanent variables
are initialised, by the relevant commands, when the monitor is created and before
any procedures are used.

In a concurrent program using monitors, we can distinguish passive and active
components. The former, introduced by declarations similar to the one seen above,
are the monitors and contain the data structures shared between the various pro-
cesses. The latter are the processes and these can interact using the procedures (and,
indirectly, the variables) of the monitors.

Already from this ﬁrst description, the advantage of monitors over semaphores
is evident: the programmer using a monitor can develop a process in a relatively
independent way, knowing only the external interface of the monitor, ignoring how
its procedures are implemented and also, in part, how these procedures are used by
other processes. This is the usual advantage of abstract data types and objects, but here
it assumes further relevance: unlike what happens in sequential programming, the
monitor is shared by various concurrent processes that are active at the same time
with different timings and speeds. Thus, it is essential to be able to develop each
process relatively independently, both from the point of view of understanding the

450

14 Concurrent Programming

program and, above all, for its correctness. Of course, problems of mutual exclusion
and synchronisation must be solved, but using monitors helps in these regards.

Indeed, mutual exclusion, using monitors, is implicitly guaranteed by the construct
itself, without the programmer having to do anything: monitor procedures are exe-
cuted in mutual exclusion by deﬁnition. More precisely, we deﬁne active a monitor
procedure that is executed upon invocation by a process. The monitor speciﬁcation
guarantees that at any instant there cannot be two active instances of monitor proce-
dures, whether they are instances of different procedures or the same procedure. The
implementation of the monitor will, of course, have to guarantee compliance with
this speciﬁcation by using appropriate lower-level mechanisms (locks, semaphores
or even interrupt inhibition).

On the other hand, even using monitors, the programmer must explicitly spec-
ify condition synchronisation, using the conditional variables of the monitor, which
allow the execution of a process to be suspended while waiting for a certain con-
dition to occur. However, even in this case, one can access variables only through
a procedure deﬁned within the monitor and only using speciﬁc operations. More in
detail, a conditional variable can be declared inside the monitor with an appropriate
syntax, for example,

cond v a r n a m e

We can conceptually regard the value of such a variable as a queue of blocked
processes. The most important monitor operations possible on such a variable are as
follows:

e m p t y ( v a r n a m e )

which returns true if the queue representing the value of varname is empty, false
otherwise.

wait ( v a r n a m e )

A process that performs this operation is blocked and is placed at the end of
the queue associated with the variable varname.12 At the same time, the process
releases the use of the monitor, which can then be used by (other) processes.
Finally, we have the operation that allows a process to wake up. This is

s i g n a l ( v a r n a m e )

which wakes up the process at the head of the queue varname if it is not empty, and
has no effect otherwise. In this way, a process that was previously blocked with a
wait can be re-executed by the signal, according to a FIFO queue management
policy: the ﬁrst process to be blocked is also the ﬁrst to be woken up. The attentive
reader will have noticed a problem at this point: since both the wait and the signal
are operations that only procedures deﬁned inside the monitor (but invocable from
outside) can use, both the process executing the signal and the awakened process
that had previously executed the wait are located “inside the monitor”. This, as we
saw earlier, is not possible, since only one monitor process can be running at any
time. In general, there are two techniques to solve this problem:

12 The queue contains only process references.

14.5 Message Exchange

451

Signal and Continue The process that sent the signal continues execution, while
the other is only woken up “virtually”, i.e., its state is changed to indicate that it
can be re-executed when it enters the monitor.

Signal and Wait

In this case, the woken process executes immediately and gains
access to the monitor. The process that sent the signal is instead blocked (and,
in this case, we can put it at the head or tail of the queue).

14.5 Message Exchange

As we have said before, in the case of distributed architectures, be they multi-
computers or networks, the communication model most commonly used is based
on the exchange of messages. Here, we analyse this model in detail, focusing on
the most important aspects that characterise it, i.e., the mechanisms for identifying
partners (or naming mechanisms) and the sending and receiving mechanisms, both
asynchronous and synchronous.

14.5.1 Naming Mechanisms

Two communicating partners, to be able to “speak” to each other, must have mecha-
nisms in place to know to whom to send and from whom to receive messages. That is,
we need mechanisms to designate, or name, the partners themselves. In this section,
we look at three alternatives. In the following, we call the two communication part-
ners sender and receiver and assume that these are processes (as usual, they could
also be threads or something else).

Names

The ﬁrst mechanism we examine is perhaps the most intuitive: processes have a
name, consisting of a unique identiﬁer and, to communicate with each other, they
explicitly use this name as an argument of send and receive operations. This way
of communicating was introduced in Hoare’s CSP language and then adopted in
other cases, such as the PVM and MPI libraries. Thus, for example, we can have two
processes A and B speciﬁed as follows

p r o c e s s A {

...
B ! v ;
...

}
p r o c e s s B {

...
A ? y ;
...

}

where process A sends the value v to process B, which receives it in the variable y
(! and ? in CSP notation indicate send and receive operations, respectively).

452

Ports

14 Concurrent Programming

The second method of identifying the communication partner uses ports. An input
port conceptually is a device that provides an entry point into the receiving process.
Similarly, an output port provides an exit point for a sender process. The main use
case for ports is that they allow, in a simple way, the same physical communica-
tion device to be shared between multiple processes. Take, for example, a transport
layer communication protocol such as TCP. If a process A wants to establish a TCP
connection with a process that is on a machine whose IP address is foo (we use
symbolic names, of course), A must specify both that address and the port number
x (between 0 and 65535) with which it wants to connect. This makes it possible
to have many different processes on the machine at address foo, active at the same
time (let us assume the machine allows multiprogramming), which also use the same
physical communication device (e.g., the same Ethernet port). The “right” process,
with which A wants to communicate, will be the one listening on port x.

Ada was one of the ﬁrst languages to use ports through so-called entry calls. A

task (Ada’s equivalent of a process) can in fact specify an input port as follows:

task T a s k T y p e is

e n t r y inputPort( data : in in t e g e r );
e n t r y outputPort( data : out in t e g e r );

end T a s k T y p e ;

This speciﬁes that a task of type TypeTask has two ports named inputPort

and outputPort. If the task body is then deﬁned as follows

task body T a s k T y p e is

...
a c c e p t inputPort( data : in in t e g e r ) do .... end inputPort
....
a c c e p t outputPort( data : out in t e g e r ) do ... end outputPort
...

end T a s k T y p e ;

then, the command accept indicates that a process Pr, of type TaskType can
receive from port inputPort a message containing a variable data of type inte-
ger. After receiving this value, the part of the program following the command do
executes. This is similar for outputPort, with the difference that, in this case, the
parameter out speciﬁes a mode of passing from the called (i.e., message receiver)
to the caller (sender).

To send a message to the process Pr, the sender process will simply execute a

command of the form

Pr .inputPort( D );

where D is a variable containing the value we wish to pass on. Note that each speciﬁc
process has its own ports, identiﬁed by the process type declaration and process
name. Thus, messages sent as seen above only reach one process.

Channels

The last method we see for establishing communication uses channels. These ﬁrst
appeared at the programming-language level in Occam, and have subsequently been

14.5 Message Exchange

453

used extensively in various theoretical models (e.g., the π -calculus) and languages.
A channel, conceptually, is an abstraction of any communication structure that allows
two partners to be connected. In this sense, even a shared variable or a monitor may be
considered as an implementation of a channel. Normally, however, the term channel
is reserved for those models that are abstractions of a real communication network,
in which we have physical channels connecting separate devices. In what follows,
we do not make any assumptions about how channels are implemented but we limit
ourselves to an abstract use of this term.

Trying to be a little more precise but, as usual, without referring to any particular

language, we can see the code

c h a n n e l c h a n N a m e ( Type )

as the declaration of a channel where the identiﬁer chanName denotes the name
of the channel and the Type of messages sent over that channel. Of course, the
limitation to one ﬁeld is made for the sake of simplicity: we may have ﬁelds of
different types, identiﬁed by appropriate names.

The sender and receiver must both know the name of a channel in order to com-
municate. Referring to the previous statement, communication is done by sending
data to the channel chanName, with the operation

send c h a n N a m e ( data )

performed by the sender, and receiving data from the channel, with the

r e c e i v e c h a n N a m e ( var )

executed by the recipient. The variables data and var of type Type: the ﬁrst
contains the values to be transmitted, while the second contains the values received
after the communication has taken place.

In practice, there are different channel models, corresponding to the different
communication mechanisms that exist. In particular, we can distinguish one-way
channels, which allow data to ﬂow in only one direction, from two-way channels,
which allow data to ﬂow in both directions.

Note also that, terminology-wise, a one-way channel connecting a sender to a
receiver is called a link, while sometimes a (one-way) channel connecting several
senders to a single receiver is called an input port. Finally, we call a channel mailbox
when we have many-to-many communication, where multiple senders can send to
multiple recipients. Below, we assume that channels are of this type unless otherwise
speciﬁed.

From the point of view of semantics, we can see a channel as a queue of messages
that have been sent and have not yet been received. The length of such a queue depends
on whether the communication is asynchronous or synchronous, as we shall see in
the next two sections.

14.5.2 Asynchronous Communication

In this and the next section, we analyse the two main ways of communicating by
exchanging messages. We do this by referring to a communication structure that uses

454

14 Concurrent Programming

channels, however, the following considerations essentially also apply when using
explicit process names or ports.

In asynchronous communication, the sender, after sending a message, continues
with the computation without waiting for the receiver to have performed the receiving
operation. In other words, with asynchronous communication the operation

send c h a n N a m e ( data )

is non-blocking: the effect of this operation is to add a message containing the value
of the variable data to the list of messages associated with the channel chanName,
after which the process that performed the send operation can continue its com-
putation. We assume, here, that the operation that accesses the channel is atomic
and also that the operation that sends the message is reliable (i.e., sent messages are
actually received, without errors).13 We also assume that the channel queue is FIFO,
so that the ﬁrst message sent is the ﬁrst received. Of course, the accuracy of these
assumptions depends on the underlying structure implementing the channels. Note
also that, at least in principle, with asynchronous communications the queue associ-
ated with the channel has an unbounded length, since an arbitrarily large number of
messages may be sent before any reception.

Reception, as mentioned before, works using an operation

r e c e i v e c h a n N a m e ( var )

The effect of this operation is as follows. If the queue associated with the channel
chanName is not empty, the receive operation fetches and removes the ﬁrst
message from the queue. The data for that message is assigned14 to the variable var
(also in this case, we assume that the access to the queue is achieved by an atomic
operation). If, however, the message queue is empty, then the receive operation is
blocked and the process that performed it is blocked as well, until there is at least one
message in the queue. When this event occurs, the blocked process is woken up—
following the modalities already described earlier, when we looked at block-based
synchronisation. Since the receive operation is always blocking, in some cases, we
want to give the process the possibility to check if the channel is empty or not, to avoid
performing (and blocking on) a receive on an empty channel. Similarly, we can
let processes deﬁne a timeout for the receive operations, which would interrupt
the wait on an empty channel after a ﬁxed amount of time from its invocation.
Some languages provide speciﬁc constructs to deal with these cases. Furthermore,
in some cases, the operation of receiving a message is not done explicitly using a
communication primitive but implicitly. This case will be considered in Sect. 14.5.4,
when we discuss Remote Procedure Calls.

As an example of the use of asynchronous communication, we see a simple inter-
action between two clients and a server. Each client sends a request to the server

13 The assumption on the atomicity of the operation on the channel implies that for a short period
(depending on how the channel is implemented), the sender process must wait before continuing.
We ignore this waiting time here.
14 Clearly, we use this term informally here, as we may have imperative languages, but also functional
or logical one.

14.5 Message Exchange

455

specifying the name of the client (1 or 2) and communicating data to be processed
(of type char). The server responds to the client by sending the processed data.

c h a n n e l r e q u e s t ( int client , char data );
c h a n n e l r e s p o n s e 1 ( char res );
c h a n n e l r e s p o n s e 2 ( char res );

p r o c e s s C l i e n t 1 {

char v a l u e s ;
char r e s u l t s ;
... // D e f i n i t i o n of v a l u e s
send r e q u e s t ( 1 , v a l u e s );
r e c e i v e r e s p o n s e 1 ( r e s u l t s );
... // U s a g e of r e s u l t s

}
p r o c e s s C l i e n t 2 {

char v a l u e s ;
char r e s u l t s ;
... // D e f i n i t i o n of v a l u e s
send r e q u e s t ( 2 , v a l u e s );
r e c e i v e r e s p o n s e 2 ( r e s u l t s );
... // U s a g e of r e s u l t s

}
p r o c e s s S e r v e r {

int c l i e n t ;
char v a l u e s ;
char r e s u l t s ;
... // I n i t i a l i s a t i o n
while true {

r e c e i v e r e q u e s t ( client , v a l u e s );
if c l i e n t = 1 t h e n {

// P r o c e s s i n g of v a l u e s

...
send r e s p o n s e 1 ( r e s u l t s );

}
if c l i e n t e = 2 then {

// P r o c e s s i n g of v a l u e s

...
send r i s p o n s e 2 ( r e s u l t s );

}

}

}

There are a few things to note in the example above. First, both clients use the
channel request to send requests to the server. The server, on the other hand, sends
replies using one channel per client. Furthermore, the channel names are static and
global to the whole program, so the correctness of communication depends on their
correct use. The process Client1, for example, could use the channel response2,
which should be reserved for answers for the second client, without there being any
control over this. To avoid possible errors, and also for conﬁdentiality, each client
could include in their message to the server the name of its local channel (not visible
to other clients) to indicate where the server shall send the reply. This, however,
would require dynamic name management, which is not generally simple. Finally,
the example is given for two clients for the sake of simplicity, but one can simply
extend it to n clients, statically known, using an array of n channels. On the other
hand, it is more complex to extend the example to manage several clients not known
beforehand (again, we would need dynamic name management to allow each client
to tell the server the name of its channel).

456

14 Concurrent Programming

14.5.3 Synchronous Communication

In synchronous communication (with the exchange of messages), the receive
operation is the same as in the asynchronous case. However, the send operation
changes to be blocking as well, i.e., the sender, after sending a message, blocks until
the receiver receives it. Therefore, at least from a conceptual point of view, in the
synchronous case, we can see send and receive as two operations that allow the
processes to synchronise when the communication is realised. From a real-world
perspective, the operations take place at different times and the sender, after having
carried out the send, waits for a signal conﬁrming the reception of the message.
Synchronous communication ﬁrst appeared in CSP.

The main advantage of synchronous over asynchronous communication is that we
can limit the maximum length of the message queue associated with a channel. In
fact, any process that sends a message cannot send another until the previous one has
been received and removed from the queue. Thus, the queue will contain at most one
message per sending process. Another advantage of synchronous communication is
error handling. If the reception of a message causes an error, if the sender is stuck
waiting for the communication to complete, it is easier to handle the anomalous
situation than if the sender has continued with its own computation.

Of course, synchronous communication also has disadvantages. First, the degree
of concurrency among processes is reduced due to the blocking send: since send
and receive operations execute at different times, when a communication takes
place, there is always at least one blocked process. This is not the case for asyn-
chronous communication, when the send operation executes before the receive.
This limitation can be relevant in real-world applications. Suppose that, following a
typical concurrent interaction pattern, we have a producer process that sends data and
a consumer process that receives it. If the two processes have different processing
times, there is no guarantee on the order in which sends and receives execute. In
any case, with each synchronous communication we have a delay due to one of the
processes stopping. If, on the other hand, we used asynchronous communications, we
would reduce the total delay, since the queue associated with the channel would act
as a buffer and mitigate the discrepancies of the different speeds: when the producer
is faster than the consumer, the messages queue in the channel; in the opposite case,
the consumer can pick as many messages (when present) as it can process. We can
obtain a similar behaviour with synchronous communication, by interposing a buffer
process between producer and consumer, however, even in this case, the efﬁciency
is lower than in the asynchronous case.

In general, efﬁciency aside, we can simulate asynchronous communication through
synchronous communication using a process that realises the asynchronous channel
and responds immediately to both senders and receivers of the channel. It is also
possible to do the opposite, since we can always pair a non-blocking send with
a receive that waits for an acknowledgement of reception from the receiving
process, thus realising synchronous communication.

A second disadvantage of synchronous communication is the greater difﬁculty
of usage for the programmer. Or rather, the programmer must pay greater attention

14.5 Message Exchange

457

because, with synchronous communication, it is easier to generate deadlocks and
other errors. As an example, let us consider two processes that communicate by both
executing sends and receives (this happens in almost all peer-to-peer applica-
tions). If both processes perform a send, we have a deadlock where the computation
cannot proceed any further, as each process is stuck waiting for a receive from
the other. Such an error would not occur with asynchronous communication since, in
this case, the send operation is non-blocking (of course, other deadlock situations
can also occur with asynchronous communication).

14.5.4 Remote Procedure Call and Rendez-Vous

We now look at two communication mechanisms that are widely used in practice,
especially in client-server interactions: the Remote Procedure Call (or RPC), used in
many languages (including Java), and the rendez-vous, introduced and extensively
used in Ada. To a ﬁrst approximation, we can see both of these mechanisms as
methods of synchronous communication via message exchange. Here, unlike the
synchronous send seen in the previous paragraph, the sender, after sending a mes-
sage, waits for a reply message from the receiver (and not just a conﬁrmation that the
message has been received) before proceeding with the computation. More precisely,
and as the names of these operations suggest, both RPCs and rendez-vous invoke
a procedure that is performed remotely, typically by a process that runs on another
machine, even geographically distant. The difference between RPC and rendez-vous
lies in the way the remote call is handled.

In the case of RPCs, the recipient generally does not have an active process waiting
for that speciﬁc call. Contrarily, when the recipient receives the message, it creates
a new process to handle it. This process is responsible for passing the parameters,
executing the body of the called procedure, and transmitting the results to the caller.
Once this is done, the process terminates its execution and any new call would trigger
the creation of a different, dedicated handling process. Of course, the underlying
communication infrastructure must handle the reception and the triggering of the
recipient upon the reception of new messages, usually done via mechanisms such as
ports and channels. In terms of message exchange, we can say that RPCs perform
only explicit send operations, called calls, but no explicit receive operations.

With rendez-vous, on the other hand, the calling process performs a rendez-vous
with an already-existing process, active in the receiver. When the call arrives, the
process executes the requested procedure (after passing the parameters, as usual), it
transmits the results to the caller, and then continues its activity, e.g., to handle new
requests. So, in this case, in addition to the sender-side call, there is also an explicit
receive operation at the receiver, such as the accept operation in Ada, already seen
in Sect. 14.5.1. Similar to the case of the receive, the accept is suspended if
there are no requests (call) to be handled.

In the following, we see some further details on RPCs, and we refer the interested

reader to specialised literature for what regards rendez-vous.

458

14 Concurrent Programming

To realise a remote procedure call, the process holding the procedure’s code must
publish at least the name of the procedure itself to the external environment, so
that it is visible and usable for the call. This is normally done in a programming
context that uses modules and, in the following, we make the assumption of having
these constructs as well. A module is therefore a component (of a program) that
contains both processes and exportable procedures. These are explicitly deﬁned in
the module itself and are distinct from local procedures that can only be used within
the module. Furthermore, the processes of a module are also divided between purely
local processes, called background processes, and processes that are created to serve
outside procedure invocations. Different modules may reside on different machines
and may communicate with each other by invoking remote procedures. A module,
therefore, has the following structure:

m o d u l e m o d N a m e {

op p r o c 1 ( type of f o r m a l p a r a m e t e r s ) r e t u r n s ( type of r e s u l t )

// h e a d e r s

...
body {

l o c a l v a r i a b l e s ;
i n i t i a l i s a t i o n code ;
p r o c p r o c 1 ( f o r m a l p a r a m e t e r s ) r e t u r n s ( r e s u l t ){

p r o c e d u r e body

// i m p l e m e n t a t i o n

}
...
l o c a l p r o c e d u r e s ;
l o c a l p r o c e s s e s ;

}

}

As can be seen, the initial part lists the names of the exportable procedures with
the names and types of the formal parameters and returned results. Then, in the body,
with the keyword proc, we deﬁne the implementation of each procedure (note that
the type of the formal parameters and results is not repeated here, only their name).
Referring to the code above, another module may call the procedure proc1 of
the module modName using the command call in which these two names and the
current parameters are speciﬁed:

call m o d N a m e . p r o c 1 ( a c t u a l p a r a m e t e r s )

As mentioned earlier, such a call causes the creation of a new process which, after
receiving the current parameters, executes the body of the procedure proc1. When
this ﬁnishes, the process sends the result to the caller and terminates. The caller,
which was stuck after the execution of the call, once it has received the results,
can continue its execution.

Note that, if the various active processes in the same module—both running in the
background and the ones executing remote calls—execute concurrently, we must use
appropriate synchronisation and mutual exclusion mechanisms, since these are in no
way provided by the RPC. Alternatively, we may assume that, in each module, there
is at most one active process at any time, similar to what happens with a monitor.

As a ﬁnal point, let us notice that in cases where RPCs are not directly supported by
the language, we can obtain them by adding so-called stubs to an existing language,
to make the remote procedure call as similar as possible to a “normal” procedure call,

14.6 Non-determinism and Parallel Composition

459

hiding from the programmer the communication details needed to handle the RPC.
Stubs are usually generated automatically by a stub compiler. When the program
makes a remote call, it actually calls a stub, which takes all the parameters necessary
for the exact identiﬁcation of the operation (name of the called procedure, actual
parameters, etc.), it builds an appropriate message containing them, and it sends the
message to another stub (sometimes called a skeleton) located at the recipient. The
second stub receives the message, extracts the parameters, and then calls the local
procedure resulting in the creation of a new process. When the execution is complete,
in a dual manner with respect to the ﬁrst interaction, the second stub creates a message
with the results and it transmits it to the ﬁrst stub, which ﬁnally extracts the results
and passes them to the process that invoked the RPC.

14.6 Non-determinism and Parallel Composition

In this section, we look at two fundamental aspects of the speciﬁcation of concurrent
computation. We begin with non-determinism.

The constructs for controlling computation that we have seen in previous chapters,
and in particular in Chap. 7, all have one common characteristic: they are determin-
istic. This means that at every moment of the computation, for a given current state,
we unequivocally know what is the next instruction to be executed and there is
never the possibility to choose between two or more equally-possible alternatives.
Take, for example, the conditional choice command if then else: the evalu-
ated condition is either true or false and, depending on the value, we execute one
of the two alternatives. It is never the case that both branches then and else are
equally possible as a continuation of the computation. In other words, in a determin-
istic computation, the initial state, in the absence of further external input, uniquely
determines the ﬁnal state.

Beyond philosophical considerations on the ultimate nature of our computing
devices, the deterministic view allows us to simplify the model of computation.
However, there are situations, especially in concurrent environments, in which such
a vision is limiting. Consider, for example, a server that, using message-exchange
communication, receives both read and write requests from two distict clients (e.g.,
to access a shared ﬁle). Requests may arrive in any order and at unpredictable times.
Furthermore, for conﬁdentiality reasons, the channels used by the two clients to
send the requests must be different. Following the scheme of the program seen in
Sect. 14.5.2 we could implement the server as follows:

460

14 Concurrent Programming

c h a n n e l r e a d i n g ( int data );
c h a n n e l w r i t i n g ( int data );
p r o c e s s R e a d i n g C l i e n t {

int r e s u l t s ;
....
send read ( r e s u l t s );
.... // u s a g e of the r e s u l t s

}
p r o c e s s W r i t i n g C l i e n t {

int v a l u e s ;
.... // d e f i n i t i o n of v a l u e s
send w r i t e ( v a l u e s );
....

}
p r o c e s s S e r v e r {
int r e s u l t s ;
int v a l u e s ;
while true {

r e c e i v e read ( r e s u l t s );
... // s e r v e r e a d i n g r e q u e s t ;
r e c e i v e w r i t e ( v a l u e s );
...
}

// s e r v e w r i t i n g r e q u e s t ;

}

However, this solution does not work well. In fact, we imposed an order for the
reception of read and write operations. For example, if a client sends a write request
but no read request was sent prior to that, the server will keep that request waiting
until it can perform the receive operation on the read channel. The wait may also
become a deadlock if the send request on the read never arrives (e.g., because the
corresponding process has aborted its execution).

To solve this kind of problem the most natural and elegant solution is to use
a construct that allows introducing non-determinism in the choice among several
alternatives. One of the ﬁrst proposals in this sense, dating back to the 1970s, by
Dijkstra, is the guarded command, which has the following structure:

c o n d i t i o n - > c o m m a n d
[ ]
c o n d i t i o n - > c o m m a n d
[ ]
...
c o n d i t i o n - > c o m m a n d

The meaning of this command is as follows. The condition (also called guard) to
the left of the arrow is a Boolean expression that is evaluated. If the condition is true,
then the corresponding branch can be chosen and the command to the right of the
arrow can be executed. If more than one condition is true, and thus more than one
branch can be executed, then one of them is chosen in an unspeciﬁed way, i.e., in a
non-deterministic way. Obviously, in the presence of such non-determinism, given
an initial state, the computation can reach several ﬁnal states.

In a more recent version of this command, the guard not only contains a Boolean
condition, but also a communication command that can also be blocked. Then, a
guard can fail if the Boolean condition has a false value, but it can succeed if the
Boolean condition has a true value and the communication command can be executed
without suspension—and it can block if the communication command blocks. If all

14.6 Non-determinism and Parallel Composition

461

the guards are blocked, then the whole command is blocked, whereas if there is at
least one successful guard, similarly to what was seen before, a branch is chosen,
non-deterministically, from among all those whose guards that are successful. If all
guards fail, the command has no effect.

Using such a command we can program our server as follows

... // same as b e f o r e
p r o c e s s S e r v e r {

int v ;
int r ;
while true {

r e c e i v e read ( r e s u l t s ) - > ... // s e r v e r e a d i n g r e q u e s t
[ ]
r e c e i v e w r i t e ( v a l u e s ) - > ... // s e r v e w r i t i n g r e q u e s t

}

}

In this way, we eliminate the problems mentioned above because, as soon as one

request is made, it can be served without having to wait for the other.

The discourse on non-determinism and its expressive power would take us far
beyond the scope of this chapter. Here, we merely observe that, at the implementation
level, appropriate, non-trivial techniques (e.g., pseudo-causal number generators) are
needed to handle it correctly. We also observe that when we use a command with a
guard in the context of an inﬁnite loop—as in the server example—a fairness problem
also arises: if a guard is always veriﬁed, we would like the corresponding branch to
be chosen sooner or later. Again, various notions of fairness and various solutions
have been proposed.

Let us conclude this paragraph with another example that shows, even more than
the previous one, the usefulness of non-determinism. Suppose we have two processes
that produce two streams of data that we wish to merge into a single stream. The
process that performs this “merging” is a particular type of ﬁlter, called a merge (in
general, a ﬁlter is a process that receives data from one or more input channels and
sends it to one or more output channels). The streams we consider are sequences, even
inﬁnite ones, of data, so it is not possible to receive ﬁrst all the data of one channel and
then all those of the other. Moreover, as it is often the case in practice, the individual
data on each channel are sent at irregular intervals, without any synchronisation or
without the possibility of making assumptions on when they will arrive. We can use
the command with guard to program the merge process as follows:

c h a n n e l i n p u t 1 ( int data );
c h a n n e l i n p u t 2 ( int data );
c h a n n e l o u t p u t ( int data );

p r o c e s s S e r v e r {

int data ;
while true {

r e c e i v e i n p u t 1 ( d a t a ) -> send o u t p u t ( data )
[ ]
r e c e i v e i n p u t 2 ( d a t a ) -> send o u t p u t ( data )

}

}

462

14 Concurrent Programming

Note that, in this way, as soon as one of the two input channels produces a piece
of data, this is sent out without having to wait for the other channel. In the edge
case in which no more data arrives at one channel, the process continues to transmit
data from the other channel. This would not have been possible by imposing a static
ordering between the receptions on the two input channels. Finally, of course, the
merge process can be arbitrarily complicated by inserting elaborations on received
data or by increasing the number of channels.

14.6.1 Parallel Composition

The second important construct for the deﬁnition of concurrent computations is the
parallel composition operator, often denoted by (cid:4).15

Intuitively, the (cid:4) operator speciﬁes that the processes constituting its operands
should be executed in parallel, i.e., concurrently. However, from a semantic point of
view, there are various possible interpretations for this. The interpretation adopted
in the case of parallel programming is what is usually referred to in theoretical
works as maximum parallelism: all processes that appear in the parallel composition
and which may proceed in the computation, do so. Of course, this interpretation
assumes an underlying multi-processor architecture. Indeed, in principle, the case of
dynamic process creation requires an architectural model with an unbound number
of processors.

Therefore, without making any assumptions about the underlying architecture, we
can deﬁne a different semantic model of the (cid:4) operator, called interleaving. According
to this model, at each instant only one of the processes can proceed in the computation,
possibly alternating its actions with those of other processes that appear in the parallel
composition (to interleave means precisely “to alternate different levels”). Thus, if
the process P can do (a computation described by) a sequence of actions s1 and
the process Q can do the sequence s2, the process P (cid:4) Q can do any sequence
obtainable by alternating arbitrarily the actions s1 and s2, provided the order given
by s1 and s2 themselves is respected. As a concrete example, if P can do the sequence
of actions abac,16 while Q can only do d, then P (cid:4) Q can do the sequences dabac,
adbac, abdac, abadc, and abacd. Note that interleaving introduces a further level
of non-determinism into the computation, since even if P and Q are deterministic
processes (each having only one possible computation for a given input), the parallel
composition P (cid:4) Q can still have more than one possible computation depending
on how one chooses to alternate the actions of the two processes (consider R (cid:4) Q,
where Q is the one from before and the process R can only do the sequence ab).

15 This operator is binary but, being associative and commutative, we can omit the parentheses in
the case of multiple occurrences of the same one.
16 Here, abac means that the process ﬁrst executes a, followed by b, a again, and ﬁnally c.

14.7 Concurrency in Java

463

14.7 Concurrency in Java

In this section, we attempt to concretise some concepts seen in this chapter by exam-
ining the case of a real language. Of course, we will only present some main aspects.
For an in-depth understanding of concurrency in Java, there are speciﬁc references
in the bibliography.

14.7.1 Creation of Threads

In Java, a sequential program contains a single thread used to execute the program’s
main method. If, however, we create several threads that execute within the same
program, then we have a form of concurrent programming (multithreaded).

Technically, a thread is an object of class Thread provided by the java.lang
package. To create a thread we can simply create an object of this class, for example
by declaring:

T h r e a d foo = new T h r e a d ();

Once we created a Thread object, and possibly deﬁned some initial parameters
(e.g., priority), we can execute the thread invoking the method start, deﬁned in
the class Thread, as in the following code:

foo . s t a r t ();

More in detail, the method start generates a new thread using the data provided
in the foo object and it invokes the method run (also deﬁned in the Thread class)
for the foo object and then terminates. At this point, the new thread is made active by
the Java Virtual Machine, which executes run. Note that the method run is directly
accessible to the programmer, but invoking it directly would make the current thread
execute its code, rather than creating a new one (as the start does). Furthermore,
each object of type Thread can only invoke the start method once.

Leaving things as they are, however, does not produce any effect, because the
method run deﬁned in the Thread class does nothing. To get some useful behaviour,
we have to deﬁne the body of the method run. We can do this in two ways.

The ﬁrst is to extend the class Thread via a subclass in which we redeﬁne the

method run. For example, if we have

c l a s s M y T h r e a d e x t e n d s T h r e a d {

p u b l i c void run () {

S y s t e m . out . p r i n t l n ( " I   am   t h r e a d   foo " );

}

}
T h r e a d foo = new M y T h r e a d ();
foo . s t a r t ();

the Thread foo is executed and its run method prints the string "I am ...".

464

14 Concurrent Programming

The other way to deﬁne a useful behaviour of the method run is by using the
interface Runnable. This interface, also provided by the java.lang package,
represents in the abstract a task, a job to be performed by the method run, which is
declared in the interface as follows:

p u b l i c void run ();

This work must be executed by a speciﬁc thread which, continuing the metaphor,
can be seen as the worker performing it. To do this, we must ﬁrst deﬁne an object of
an arbitrary class, say C, that implements the Runnable interface and then provide
speciﬁc code for the run method. Next, we need to create an object of class C so
that we have a speciﬁc instance of our work. Then, we need to pass the object thus
created to a speciﬁc object of class Thread via the constructor of this class. Finally,
the work can begin using the start method, as seen above.

The example from before, realised using the Runnable interface, becomes the

following:

c l a s s C i m p l e m e n t s R u n n a b l e {

p u b l i c void run () {

S y s t e m . out . p r i n t l n ( " I   am   t h r e a d   foo " );

}

}
R u n n a b l e c = new C ();
T h r e a d foo = new T h r e a d ( c );
foo . s t a r t ();

Note that c has static type Runnable and dynamic type C and that this object
is passed to the constructor of the class Thread to allow the method run to be
executed. This method, as before, writes the string when the thread is activated by
the start method.

The advantage of this alternative method is the possibility of having several inter-
faces implemented by a single class, allowing the deﬁnition of a class that has exe-
cutable objects (as an implementation of Runnable) and that, at the same time,
implements other interfaces that deﬁne other characteristics of the objects. The ﬁrst
approach cannot implement such behaviour, since, as we have seen, Java supports
single inheritance (cf. Sect. 10.2.5 and following). Moreover, the class Thread,
which also implements Runnable, often contains much more than what is needed
to execute a thread.

14.7.2 Scheduling and Termination of Threads

Normally, multithreaded systems have more threads than processors, so it is nec-
essary to deﬁne scheduling policies that allow us to appropriately divide CPU time
between the various threads running. These policies, in detail, depend on the partic-
ular implementation of the Java Virtual Machine and the platform on which we are
running our Java applications. In general, we can say that each thread has a priority
that is used by the system at runtime to determine which thread to execute next. How-
ever, some mechanisms limit the amount of CPU time that can be used by a single
thread to avoid the so-called starvation of lower-priority threads, i.e., to prevent the

14.7 Concurrency in Java

465

latter from never being executed in the presence of higher-priority executable threads.
An executing thread, therefore, continues to use the CPU until it either performs a
blocking operation that, as we have already seen, causes the CPU to release, or until
it receives an interrupt from the system, an operation normally called preemption.
This interruption occurs either because a thread with a higher priority has become
ready to be executed or because the system scheduler has decided that the executing
thread has exceeded its CPU usage quota. Threads may also voluntarily release the
CPU using speciﬁc methods such as sleep.

The priority of a thread is initially the same as the thread that created it and can be
changed using the command setPriority to set a value between the constants
MIN_PRIORITY and MAX_PRIORITY. The use of this command must be done
bearing in mind that the actual execution of the various threads depends not only
on the priority but also on the policy used by the scheduler. Therefore, while it
certainly makes sense to assign a higher priority to a thread that we wish to execute
before another one (e.g., the one corresponding to a function that interrupts the
normal execution of our application), we must not think that the values expressed by
priorities are absolute.

A thread terminates and thus permanently releases the computing resources it is
using when it terminates the execution of the method run. However, there are other
termination modalities.

First, using the interrupt method, an interrupt signal can be sent to a thread
which, even if it does not directly cause the termination of an active thread, can be
appropriately handled in the program of the receiving thread to cause termination.
For example, if we have two threads t1 and t2, we can have in t1 the code

t2 . i n t e r r u p t ()

while in the thread t2 we can have

...
w h i l e ( ! i n t e r r u p t e d () ){

...

}

This way, when t1 invokes (or, more commonly said, “throws”) the interrupt, the
while loop is interrupted and the thread t2 can terminate (if there is nothing
else to do after the while). Note that an interrupt causes the waiting period of a
blocked thread to be interrupted. Furthermore, if the thread is executing a sleep or
wait method, when it receives an interrupt request a InterruptedException
is thrown, which must be handled appropriately.

A second aspect of thread termination concerns the fact that, normally, in a mul-
tithreaded application we have a main thread and other threads that are launched
from this and executed concurrently. If the main thread terminates, what happens to
the other threads depends on their nature. Here, we distinguish between user threads
and daemon threads. Daemon threads are threads deﬁned as daemons through the
invocation of the method setDaemon( true ) and all those threads created by
daemons. User threads are all the threads not speciﬁcally set as daemons. The lat-
ter continue their execution even if the main thread has terminated, while daemon
threads terminate immediately when there are no more active user threads.

466

14 Concurrent Programming

14.7.3 Synchronisation and Communication Between Threads

As we have seen in previous sections, in presence of concurrent threads, we need
appropriate synchronisation and inter-thread communication mechanisms to prevent
incorrect access to shared data. The solution adopted in Java is similar to what we
have seen in the case of monitors, although there are some peculiarities due to the
interplay with the object-oriented paradigm.

Usually, the shared data for which we want to guarantee mutual exclusion in Java
are objects (but there are also static ﬁelds). We have a lock associated with every object
that, to guarantee synchronization, must be acquired before the object is used and
released afterwards. However, as in the case of monitors, the Java programmer does
not have to make these operations explicit, and they must simply use synchronized
methods (or commands). Such methods are declared in the class where we want to
guarantee mutual exclusion. When we invoke a synchronized method on an object in
a speciﬁc thread, before accessing the object, the method performs an (implicit) lock
acquisition operation on the object. When the method terminates (either normally,
or by throwing an exception) the lock is released. If the lock on an object has already
been acquired, invocations from other threads on any synchronized method of the
same object are locked, waiting for the lock to be released. Methods that are not
synchronized can proceed normally. Note that the lock on an object is possessed by
a thread and not by a single method: so, if a synchronized method that possesses a
lock on an object invokes another synchronized method on the same object (in the
same thread) the computation proceeds without waits (indeed, the thread already has
the lock on that object).

As an example of using synchronized methods, let us see a program in which we
want to implement a counter that multiple threads can access, concurrently, to read
the value and increment or decrement it.

c l a s s C o u n t e r {
p r i v a t e int c ;
p u b l i c C o u n t e r ( int s t a r t i n g V a l u e ) {

c = s t a r t i n g V a l u e ;

}
p u b l i c s y n c h r o n i z e d int read () {

r e t u r n c ;

}
p u b l i c s y n c h r o n i z e d void i n c r e m e n t () {

c ++;

}
p u b l i c s y n c h r o n i z e d void d e c r e m e n t () {

c - -;

}

}

As seen above, the constructor of a class does not have to be declared synchronized,
since it is invoked by only one thread for each speciﬁc object. The other methods
declared synchronized, guarantee mutual exclusion in accessing the counter. At this
point, continuing in the example, we can create the threads that use the counter:

14.7 Concurrency in Java

467

c l a s s Incr e x t e n d s T h r e a d {

int v a l u e ;
C o u n t e r c o u n t e r ;
p u b l i c Incr ( int v , C o u n t e r c ){

v a l u e = v ;
c o u n t e r = c ;

}
p u b l i c void run (){

for ( int i = 0; i < v a l u e ; i ++ ) {

c o u n t e r . i n c r e m e n t ();

}

}

}
c l a s s Decr e x t e n d s T h r e a d {

int v a l u e ;
C o u n t e r c o u n t e r ;
p u b l i c Decr ( int v , C o u n t e r c ){

v a l u e = v ;
c o u n t e r = c ;

}
p u b l i c void run (){

for ( int i = 0; i < v a l u e ; i ++ ) {

c o u n t e r . d e c r e m e n t ();

}

}

}
c l a s s Main {

s t a t i c C o u n t e r c o u n t e r = new C o u n t e r ( 0 );
p u b l i c s t a tic void main ( int i n c r N u m b e r , int d e c r N u m b e r ){

= new Incr ( incrNumber , c o u n t e r );
T h r e a d i n c _ t h r e a d
T h r e a d d e c r _ t h r e a d = new Decr ( decrNumber , c o u n t e r );
i n c _ t h r e a d . s t a r t ();
d e c r _ t h r e a d . s t a r t ();

}

}

As can be seen in the code above, the methods run of the two classes extending
Thread deﬁne the behaviour for the two types of threads, namely incrementing
and decrementing the counter. The value of the increment is passed as a parameter
to the main method and, thus, to the constructor of the class Incr (the case of
decrementing is similar), which creates a new object of that class that is also a new
thread. The constructor of the Incr object also passes a reference to an object of type
Counter, which is the one that contains the counter that the two threads perform
their increment and decrement operations on. Mutual exclusion is guaranteed by the
fact that the methods declared in Counter are synchronized. The method start,
as we have already seen, starts the execution of the threads.

Keep in mind that, in the previous example (and in general), although mutual
exclusion is guaranteed, we cannot make any assumption on the order in which the
methods are invoked in the different threads running in parallel. As mentioned earlier,
this depends on the thread scheduler; so if we want the threads to respect a speciﬁc
order we must explicitly schedule them in that way.

We can also declare static methods as synchronized to ensure synchronization
in accessing static data shared by multiple threads. In addition, as mentioned ear-
lier, portions of code, more limited than an entire method, can also be declared as
synchronized. In this case, the syntax is as follows.

468

14 Concurrent Programming

s y n c h r o n i z e d ( e x p r e s s i o n ){

c o m m a n d s

}

The meaning of that synchronized command is analogous to that of synchronized
methods, with two important differences. First, the object on which we request lock
acquisition is not the current one (i.e., this) but it is the object whose reference is
the result of the evaluation of expression (which, of course, must be of the right
type). In this way, we can then express synchronization on multiple objects through
a single method, thus allowing us to quickly specify sophisticated interactions. The
second difference is in the fact that, here, the portion of code that is executed in the
critical section (between the acquisition and release of the lock) is limited by the
scope of the construct. This has positive performance consequences, since having
shorter critical regions makes it possible to limit the waiting time for threads that
want to access the same data.

The synchronized methods allow mutual exclusion but not conditional synchro-
nization. To accomplish this, thus allowing threads to communicate directly with
each other, Java provides the speciﬁc methods wait, notify, and notifyAll,
all deﬁned in the class Object. The wait method, similar to the monitors com-
mand of the same name, blocks the execution of a thread until a certain condition
occurs. The methods notify and notifyAll, on the other hand, are similar to
the signal command and notify one or all the blocked threads that a condition has
occurred, waking them up.

In more detail, these three methods are invoked through a speciﬁc object and
must be executed in synchronized portions of the code, which means we already
acquired the lock on that object.

The wait method releases the lock on the object and suspends execution of the
thread, which is then placed in the wait queue associated with the object. The queue
is usually handled with FIFO policy, but there can be exceptions since, as seen,
different priorities can be used. In Java, there are no explicit conditional variables as
in monitors, however, we can think of there being an implicit conditional variable
for each object.

The method notify awakens a thread from among those in the wait queue of
the object on which the method itself is invoked. The awakened thread cannot be
chosen and it is the ﬁrst one in the queue. Given the queue management, which does
not always guarantee the FIFO policy, in practice, one must be very careful in using
this method to wake up the desired thread. The method notifyAll, on the other
hand, wakes up all threads waiting on the object, so it is easier to use. In the case of
both notify and notifyAll, the thread invoking the method retains the lock on
the object, so the awakened thread(s) can only be executed later when they manage
to acquire the lock on the object. Using the terminology seen for monitors, these
methods have signalling and continuous semantics.

14.9 Bibliographical Notes

469

Note on Distributed Programming in Java

The constructs we have seen so far enable multithreaded concurrent programming.
Java does not contain speciﬁc primitives for distributed concurrent programming;
however, some packages support it. In particular, the package java.net allows
communication with message exchange either using datagrams and the UDP pro-
tocol or using streams and TCP. This package provides the classes Socket and
ServerSocket that allow many client/server type applications to be programmed
using sockets (basically terminals of a connection). With the ﬁrst of the two classes,
we can create a socket by providing a hostname (or IP address), a port number for
that host, and a local port number with which to associate the socket itself. This is
then used, typically on the client side, to communicate data. The ServerSocket
class, on the other hand, allows a particular socket to be created to sit on a port, on
the server side, waiting for requests for connections.

Java also contains two packages, java.rmi and java.rmi.server that sup-
port remote procedure calling, here called RMI (Remote Method Invocation). The
operation is similar to the one we described in Sect. 14.5.4, with the command rmic
being the analogue of the stub compiler there described. Please refer to the Java
manuals for further details on these packages.

14.8 Summary

In this chapter, we have looked at the main issues in concurrent programming, an
important topic that would require far more space than we have been able to devote
to it to be treated comprehensively. We examined the following aspects.

• The notion of threads, process, and the three main modes of concurrent program-

ming: parallel, multithreaded, and distributed.

• The synchronization mechanisms used in shared memory models and in particular

active waiting, semaphores, and monitors.

• The communication mechanisms used in message exchange models and in partic-
ular asynchronous communication, asynchronous communication, remote proce-
dure call, and rendezvous.

• The non-deterministic computation models and guarded commands.
• The main constructs for multithreaded programming in Java, namely thread cre-

ation, termination and scheduling primitives, and synchronized methods.

14.9 Bibliographical Notes

The bibliography on concurrent programming is extensive and ranges from purely
theoretical aspects to practical manuals. Particularly important in the area of the the-

470

14 Concurrent Programming

ory are the, so-called, process algebras; formalisms that make it possible to describe
concurrent processes and that are endowed with algebraic laws that allow properties
of computations to be formally veriﬁed. Among the most important approaches in
this area are Hoare’s CSP [1], Milner’s CCS , and, more recently, the π -calculus
[2]. Also very important were the many contributions of Edsger W. Dijkstra to the
theory of concurrency: in [3] semaphores were introduced, in [4] the idea of monitors
(under the name of “secretary”), and in [5] guarded commands.

Several educational texts deal comprehensively with concurrent programming
issues. These include [6], which gives a broad overview of the main techniques used,
with precise references to various current languages. For concurrent programming
in Java, in addition to the classic handbook [7] one can consult [8].

14.10 Exercises

1. Consider the following code snippet:

int x = 4;
int y = 6;
< x = x +y > (cid:4) < y = y - x >
where (cid:4) denotes parallel composition and assumes that all commands enclosed
in the parenthesis < > execute atomically. What are the possible results? Does
removing the angle brackets change the results?

2. Referring to the notation of the previous exercise, consider the following code

fragment:

int x = 2;
int y = 8;
w h i l e ( x != y ) { x = x +1;} (cid:4) w h i l e ( x != y ) { y = y -1;}

Does the computation end? Justify the answer.

3. Suppose we have an instruction swap(x,y) that atomically swaps the contents
of the two variables x and y (using an internal register to perform the swap).
Using such an instruction realize the procedures for acquiring and releasing the
lock for access to a critical section (see Sect. 14.4.1).

4. Simulate general semaphores using binary semaphores lights.
5. Consider the following code fragment

int x = 10;
sem s1 = 1;
sem s2 = 0;
{ P ( s1 ); P ( s2 ); x = x -5; V ( s2 ); Vs ( 1 ) ; } (cid:4)
{ P ( s1 ); x = x *2; V ( s1 ); V ( s2 );}
where sem denotes the semaphore type, (cid:4) denotes the parallel composition while
P and V are the operations on the semaphores we have seen. Say what are the
possible ﬁnal values for the variable x after execution of the fragment.

6. Provide a solution to the problem of dining philosophers using a centralized

controller.

References

471

7. Extend the client-server application of the example 14.5.2 to the case where the
number of clients is not statically known (use appropriate primitives that allow
the creation of new names and the forwarding of names on channels).

8. Using any pseudo-language that allows only synchronous communication, sim-
ulate asynchronous communication by programming an appropriate process that
realizes the asynchronous channel.

9. Write a program that solves the problem of the unisex bathroom: a bathroom can
be used by both men and women, and an arbitrary number of people can be in
the bathroom at the same time, however, there cannot be men and women at the
same time.

10. Provide a solution to the dining philosophers’ problem that uses a moni-
tor. The monitor should have two operations acquireForks( id ) and
releaseForks( id ), of obvious meaning, where id is the identiﬁer of
the philosopher process that calls the operation.

11. Let a monitor be deﬁned to operate a common account. The operations of the
monitor must allow the deposit and withdrawal of money by more than one
person (process) sharing the use of the account. The account balance cannot
become negative, and if a withdrawal of an amount greater than the balance is
requested, this operation must be blocked until the balance becomes greater than
or equal to the requested amount.

12. Using asynchronous communication, develop ﬁlter processes to sort an array of
n elements as follows. The various ﬁlter processes are cascaded one after the
other. The ﬁrst receives the data, one at a time, retains the minimum value and
passes the remainder to the second process. The other processes do the same:
they receive a stream of values from the previous one, retain the minimum and
pass the remaining values to the next. Assume that each process can store only
two values (the minimum and the next input data).

13. Produce code that, using asynchronous communication, solves the following
problem of stable marriage. You have two vectors of n elements, A and B,
respectively. Each member of A sorts any member of B from 1 to n (based on
his preferences) and each member of B does the same with the members of A.
A pairing is a two-way correspondence between A and B. A pairing is stable
if there are no two pairs (a1, b1) and (a2, b2) in it such that a1 prefers b2 to b1
and b2 prefers a1 to a2 (i.e., there is no A-B pair in which both people prefer the
other to their current partner).

References

1. C.A.R. Hoare, Communicating sequential processes. Commun. ACM 21(8), 666–677 (1978)
2. R. Milner, J. Parrow, D. Walker, A calculus of mobile processes, I and II. Inf. Comput. 100(1),

1–77 (1992)

3. E.W. Dijkstra, Co-operating sequential processes, in Programming Languages. ed. by F. Genuys

(Academic-Press, London, 1968), pp. 43–112

4. E.W. Dijkstra, Hierarchical ordering of sequential processes. Acta Informatica 1, 115–138 (1971)

472

14 Concurrent Programming

5. E.W. Dijkstra, Guarded commands, non-determinancy and a calculus for the derivation of pro-
grams, in ed. by F.L. Bauer, K. Samelson, Language Hierarchies and Interfaces, volume 46 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Springer, 1975), pp. 111–124

6. G.R. Andrews, Foundations of Multithreaded, Parallel, and Distributed Programming (Addison-

Wesley, 1999)

7. K. Arnold, J. Gosling, D. Holmes, The Java Programming Language, 4th edn. (Addison-Wesley

Professional, Boston, 2005)

8. D. Lea, Concurrent Programming in Java: Design Principles and Pattern, 2nd ed. (Prentice

Hall, 1999)
