# Fuente
- archivo: 487-532.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/(Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science) Maurizio Gabbrielli_ Simone Martini - Programming Languages_ Principles and Paradigms (2nd Edition)-Springer (2023)/487-532.pdf
- extraido: 2026-04-27T21:01:43

# Contenido

Service-Oriented Programming
Paradigm

15

15.1 Towards Services

15.1.1 Distributed Programs

In Chap. 14, we saw how distributed programming is a kind of concurrent program-
ming where concurrent programs run on different distributed physical structures.

Physical distribution is the key to understanding how the practice of building dis-
tributed applications compelled the deﬁnition of a dedicated programming paradigm,
oriented towards “services”.

Distributed programming has made it ordinary (as much as we take these as
commodities) to exchange media (messages, photos, videos) with people all over the
world, as well as accessing, ordering, and paying for products and services online.
However, the practice of programming distributed systems comes with its speciﬁc
challenges. Indeed, the departure from shared-memory models and the availability
of solutions that let any two processes “talk” to each other (brieﬂy presented in
Chap. 14) makes it difﬁcult to check the correctness of distributed programs (e.g.,
that the composition is type-safe).

Looking at a practical case, local programs—we use the term throughout the
chapter to indicate non-distributed applications—let us check Data Abstraction (see
Chap. 9) by assembling the program modules and verifying that said modules comply
with the interfaces they promise to implement. This holds because we can check
compliance over the whole program (either statically or dynamically, cf. Sect. 8.8).
That assumption generally falls for distributed programs. As seen in Sect. 14.5, one
can easily parametrise the different techniques that let processes exchange messages,
so that any two processes can dynamically interact and exchange messages. In this
dynamic compositions, the only things that the processes witness are each other’s
messages, which makes checking compliance a multi-faceted problem:

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
M. Gabbrielli and S. Martini, Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms,
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34144-1_15

473

474

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

(cid:129) Are messages transported in a reliable or unreliable fashion?
(cid:129) Do the programs see the same ordering of messages (e.g., as seen by the sender)?
(cid:129) Can the receiver re-order messages?
(cid:129) Are the messages in the format that the addressee expects to see (is it able to parse

them)?

(cid:129) Do the messages invoke operations that the addressee actually provides?
(cid:129) Is the data contained in the messages compliant with the types of the related

operation?

(cid:129) How should the sender and receiver handle errors (do they need to communicate

them to the other party)?

In the previous chapters, we saw techniques for local programs that can give
us (static or dynamic) guarantees on compliance—and one can assume invariants,
like the preservation of invocation order between caller and callee, because they
share the same runtime. In distributed programs, caller and callee not only can run
on different machines, but communication protocols determine how they exchange
messages. Moreover, they can also run different runtimes, with different ways to
represent the same concepts and data structures (e.g., when implemented using dif-
ferent programming languages). This means that, to provide compliance guarantees,
linguistic techniques must either assume some of those elements ﬁxed (e.g., com-
munication preserves order, errors work like exceptions, cf. Sect. 7.3) or be able to
compositionally reason on these.

As a concrete example, we can write a server that waits on a port for a mes-
sage from some client. This exchange represents a dynamic module composition
of which we cannot check any static compliance (we do not know the identity of
the client until it contacts the server). Of course, if the server receives an
unexpected message from the client (e.g., on an operation it does not provide) the
server might infer that the client does not comply with the interface it agreed
to implement. However, this check (if any) is local only to the server, and, poten-
tially, it does not make sense to inform other modules of such occurrence, e.g., even
informing the client might not be possible, unless there was a previous agreement
(an interface) that the client is supposed to implement for such occasions.

These challenges, called for the development of a discipline, ascribed to the
umbrella term “service-oriented programming”, equipped with dedicated abstrac-
tions, techniques, and technologies able to help programmers deﬁne, reason on, and
verify properties of the composition of distributed programs.

15.1.2 Open Systems

From a historical perspective, distributed programming exploded in popularity in
the 1990s, with the advent of the digital economy—based on the exchange of digital
information among people and businesses—and thanks to the widespread availability
of networked connections and the Internet—the global system of interconnected
computers behind, e.g., the World Wide Web and electronic mail.

15.1 Towards Services

475

To reach worldwide adoption, many developers of distributed applications needed
to follow an open approach to distributed programming. Their users needed interop-
erating programs to allow them to interact and communicate. While one can achieve
interpretability by adopting a closed approach—where the components of a given
program are ﬁxed, as well as their runtimes; which has the beneﬁt of supporting
compliance checks akin to local programs—this would hardly scale to meet the
ever-growing needs of millions (and then billions) of users spread across the globe.
For example, this approach would imply the unreasonable need to update all pro-
grams (in all computers spread around the globe) that interact over the Internet, just
because we introduced or updated a single component, e.g., a website.

Thus, to not stymie the growth of the Internet, developers needed to adopt an open
approach to implementing distributed programs. In particular, they needed to deﬁne
and adopt standards that allowed their software components to interact with other
components they neither wrote nor knew any implementation details of.

As an example from our daily lives, we assemble an open, distributed system every
time we connect the Web browser installed in our devices to a Web server that pro-
vides access to information pages, seller listings or search results. Among the many
standards our Web browsers are built upon, we ﬁnd the Internet Protocol (IP), the
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), the
Extensible Markup Language (XML), and the JavaScript Object Notation (JSON).

15.1.3 Loose Coupling and Interoperability

Summarising, a relevant portion of distributed programs are and need to be open.
The two fundamental principles that support such openness are loose coupling and
interoperability.

Loose coupling indicates a weak association among the modules that make up a
program, so that internal changes to a module are unobservable by the other modules
in the program. In a distributed setting, this principle—which extends the principle
of abstraction seen for objects (see Sect. 10.2.3)—means that modules have little to
no knowledge of the internal details of the other modules and, thus, a high degree of
freedom concerning the technology used for their implementation (e.g., hardware,
execution environment, implementation language, and logic).

The other piece of the puzzle regards interoperability. We have loosely-coupled
modules that can employ disparate technologies for their implementation. Now, to
realise the logic of our distributed program, we need to let these modules invoke
operations of and exchange data with the other modules that make up the program.
Coupling and interoperability are linked concepts. Strongly-coupled modules are
inherently interoperable (e.g., imagine an object invoking a method of another object,
sending to it the reference to some data in memory). This is because strongly-coupled
modules implicitly share a large amount of interoperability choices dictated by the
implementation technology, e.g., how modules interact or how data is represented,
moved, and stored. On the contrary, loosely-coupled modules need to make interop-
erability choices explicit, e.g., how one module can invoke an operation of another

476

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

module (e.g., what transport technology) and how they should transmit data (e.g.,
what data format).

While interoperability decisions can concern a single distributed program—so
that the developers can adopt internal conventions to make their modules interact—to
obtain open distributed systems, we need to deﬁne (and adopt) standard technolo-
gies for interoperability. In this way, developers can integrate into their distributed
programs any modules with interoperable technology stacks. Similarly, different
distributed programs can interact as long as they are interoperable.

When looking at the linguistic abstractions and technologies for service-oriented
programming, we will see how these are involved in capturing and supporting loose
coupling and interoperability of services.

15.1.4 Approaching Services

Although the ﬁrst proposals for a service-oriented paradigm date to the early 2000s,
the concept of service in computer science predates service orientation. Indeed, we
can ﬁnd the name “service”, associated with some of the properties that service-
oriented programming ascribes to it, in contexts that precede the paradigm.

For instance, we ﬁnd many examples of network technologies characterised by the
interaction of layers, each devoted to dealing with a speciﬁc aspect of communication.
Conceptually, developers of network stacks see these layers as abstract machines,
each providing these functionalities as services to the adjacent layers. For example,
a layer can manage the physical hardware that emits and receives signals, and it
can serve two operations; one that returns an array of bits once it received a set
amount of signals and one that accepts an array of bits, with the promise to emit
them as a sequence of signals. An adjacent layer to the one just described can use
this “physical” service to implement some packet-switching logic.

Similarly, in operating systems, we ﬁnd (nomen omen) Windows services and Unix
daemons (not to be confused with daemon threads, cf. Sect. 14.7.2) that are processes
run by the operating system to provide services to users. An exemplary Unix daemon
is sshd, which is a program that provides operations that let users perform remote
access and command execution. Another is dbus-daemon, a component of the
reference implementation of the D-Bus inter-process communication service, which
provides operations that let processes communicate with each other as if they were
connected via a communication bus—the daemon routes messages from and to any
process connected to the bus.

Remembering the contents of Sects. 9.2 and 10.2.3, this tendency towards services
does not surprise us at all; it is the application of the concepts of information hiding
and data encapsulation, where we break down the complexity of a software system
into modules—each exposing a set of operations to the other modules and hiding
away details like internal logic and state representation.

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

477

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

15.2.1 Services, a Layered View

Despite the existence of conventions and practices for building distributed programs
out of software units seen as services, it is only with the advent of service orientation
that services became the ﬁrst-class citizens of a dedicated programming paradigm.
In service orientation, a service is an independent process offering operations
accessible via message exchange. This means that the service hides its internal state
(and representation) and the only access surface for users is the one provided by
operations, accessible through message-based invocations.

Services and Objects

If the above deﬁnition of service reminds some readers of the deﬁnition of objects
given by object orientation, they are not on a wrong track. Indeed, as stated in
Sect. 10.2.1, an object is a capsule that encloses both some data and the operations
that manipulate it and the users of the object can interact with the former only by
invoking those operations, collected in a public interface, via messages.

Conceptually, the distinction between objects and services is relatively thin, as
it hinges on the fact that an object does not correspond to an independent process.
However, this small conceptual divergence makes a lot of difference in practice.

As seen, e.g., in Sect. 10.3.1, for performance reasons, the mainstream inter-
pretation of “invocation via messages” in object-oriented languages concretises in
efﬁcient procedures that execute the code related to a given method/operation and
pass to it possible parameters as memory references.

If, on one side, this interpretation makes implemented object-oriented languages
efﬁcient, on the other side, it makes it impossible for programmers to natively
let objects interact with each other via other means than memory—resorting to
either implementing ad-hoc procedures, such as stubs for remote procedure calls
(cf. Sect. 14.5.4), or using technology-speciﬁc solutions, like Java remote method
invocations (cf. Sect. 14.7.3).

The principle of independence of execution of services breaks any of such
technology-speciﬁc optimisations, and it forces developers (and language designers)
to ﬁrst consider the conceptual traits that determine a service and, as a consequence,
the stack of technologies that one can use to implement it.

We draw the relation between the conceptual and the technological layers of
a service in Fig. 15.1. In the ﬁgure, the two-dimensional positioning of the items
follows an arrangement that keeps close elements that relate to each other between
the layers (where, of course, the technological one is not exhaustive).

Conceptual Layer

The conceptual layer describes in abstract terms the traits that characterise a service,
which then identify different sets of technologies that one can use to implement those
traits and, by extension, the service.

478

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

Interfaces

Conceptual 
layer

Data Types

Operations

Messaging
Patterns

Behaviours 
(Orchestration/Choreography)

XML

SOAP

WSDL

Kafka

Java

WS-CDL

Technological 
layer

JSON

ESB

REST

HTTP(S)

BPMN

BPEL

Jolie Types

Jolie Interfaces

Jolie Ports

Jolie Behaviour

Choral

Fig. 15.1 Layers of service-oriented programming

As shown in Fig. 15.1, we can roughly divide the elements of the conceptual layer
in two sets. One is that of the interfaces, where we ﬁnd the items that the service
exposes to its users: the operations it is willing to perform, how users should call them
(i.e., their respective messaging patterns), and the shape of the data that it expects to
receive and yield. The other set is that of behaviours, which regards the logic of the
service both used internally, e.g., to compute the response following a request from
the user, and to perform external invocations, e.g., to other services to accomplish
some multi-party goals.

Interfaces

Like in abstract data types and objects, interfaces represent the public view provided
to users. In interfaces, the “data types” describe the structure of the data that the
service either expects to receive and/or promises to produce at the invocation of its
operations. The “operations” offered by a service correspond to a set of invocable
labels. Notably, services do not commit to the typical request-response “messaging
pattern” seen for, e.g., object methods (which, in turn, adheres to the common stack-
based control-transfer model, discussed in Chap. 7). On the contrary, besides being
associated with one or more data structures used for the invocation, operations specify
the way in which they expect to exchange messages with their users. For example, an
operation invocation can follow the unreliable one-way message exchange pattern,
where the invoker sends to the service its message without any guarantee of either
reception nor consumption from the service. Another alternative are reliable one-
way exchanges, where the invoker waits to receive an acknowledgement of message
reception (but not of its consumption) from the service.

Behaviours

The last element of the conceptual layer, that of behaviours, ties together state and
interfaces of a service.

To introduce this concept, let us look one last time at non-concurrent models for
objects. While objects enclose state, the latter does not inﬂuence the possibility for

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

479

the object itself to respond to an invocation on any of its methods—at most, we might
trigger some errors or exceptions, but the invocation is always available. In services,
a developer can write a service in a way that it expects to receive a message for,
e.g., an access operation, which enables the invocation of a count operation—
that returns to the user the current count of accesses registered by the service.
As argued in Sect. 14.5.3, if the user is not aware of that linearisation of the two
operations, their interaction could end up in a deadlock. For example, the user can
send in parallel the two invocations, assuming that the service would ﬁrst consume
the access and then (consume and) respond to the count. On the contrary, if a)
due to non-determinism, the service can receive ﬁrst the invocation of count and
then access, and b) the service assumes a FIFO (cf. Sect. 14.4.2) ordering of the
messages—so that it consumes the messages only in their order of arrival—, the
interaction between the two becomes stuck.

For behaviours, service-oriented programming distinguishes between two
approaches to implement the distributed logic of services: orchestration and chore-
ography. The plural “services” in the previous passage is important, as the matter
on how to program the logic of a service becomes relevant when a single service
might not sufﬁce to accomplish some task, but rather requires the interaction of two
or more services.

As an example, imagine a shop and a bank services, which need to interact
with a user client, to implement an e-commerce transaction. There, the logic of the
transaction can either be controlled by one of the two services or distributed among
them.

In orchestration, one service, called the orchestrator, implements the distributed
behaviour by coordinating the other services that take part in the composition. In
the example, if we elect the shop as the orchestrator, it would, e.g., coordinate the
interaction with the user and the bank, such as asking the user for its address, and
preparing the transfer order for the bank.1 Here, the user and the bank assume
passive roles, i.e., they expose basic operations that are (ideally) always available
and that the orchestrator (the shop) invokes to enact the distributed logic of the
transaction. Summarising, in orchestration, the distributed logic is mainly deﬁned
and executed by the orchestrator, which coordinates and mediates all the interactions
among the other services that take part in the composition.

While orchestration has the good trait of concentrating the logic of the distributed
composition in one service—making it easy for programmers to both implement
and check its correctness against some reference speciﬁcation—the orchestrator is a
single point of control. This can present both functional and performance problems.
For instance, the orchestrator can see all the data that it routes among the services it
coordinates, and it can unilaterally dictate what operations the other services must
perform. If our program has a functional requirement of not allowing the parties to
trust the central orchestrator to do the “right thing”, we cannot adopt orchestration—

1 For simplicity, we assume a naïve bank that directly trusts third-party requests and does not employ
authentication procedures, like multifactor authentication, to make sure requests are genuinely
coming from its clients.

480

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

imagine, in the user-bank-shop example, a fraudulent shop that has the bank bill
two times the user for the same product. Looking at performance, orchestration
can imply an increase in the number of messages exchanged among the services. For
example, since the shop orchestrator mediates the interactions between the bank
and the user, instead of one direct message, from the former to the latter, we have
three: (1) the shop asks the bank to provide the message for the user, (2) the
bank responds with the message, and (3) the shop sends the message to the user.
When bandwidth is limited, it has high latency or message payloads are heavy, this
increase in the number of messages exchanged can severely impact the performance
and usability of the distributed program.

Hence, there are scenarios where we cannot clearly ﬁnd an orchestrator to mediate
the whole distributed interaction. In this case, the services must implement the dis-
tributed logic of the transaction as a choreography, i.e., in a way that each participant
knows and implements its part in the interaction. The name “choreography” comes
from the fact that, like in an actual choreographed performance, each service in a
choreography plays a speciﬁc role in it and enacts the actions which that role is sup-
posed to carry out. We can see the duality between orchestration and choreography
as the difference between, respectively, having one service enacts the logic of the
whole distributed program by coordinating the other services and having the services
enact that logic through their autonomous interactions. In this case, the choreogra-
pher is not a service itself (as opposed to the orchestrator), but it is the entity (e.g.,
the programmer) that deﬁned the choreography.

Choreographies, although not named in this way, predate service orientation and
are akin to any model useful to specify the sequence of interactions among different
parties (some early examples in computer science are the security protocol Alice-
and-Bob notation, message-sequence charts, and sequence diagrams).

While the general understanding of orchestration is established, there is currently
no standard interpretation of the usage of choreographies. For instance, we can
see choreographies as reference speciﬁcations, so that programmers should look at
a choreography to correctly implement the services that participate in it. Another
interpretation is that of an advanced kind of type, where programmers use chore-
ographies to mechanically check that the implementation of their services complies
with their intended role in the choreography. A third interpretation is considering
choreographies as programs. In this case, developers specify the actions and interac-
tions of all the involved services as a choreographic program. Then, given a source
choreography, the developers use a compiler to automatically generate the correct
code of all the services that participate therein. We illustrate these possible interpre-
tations in Sect. 15.2.5. Of course, these interpretations are far from being mutually
exclusive and, for example, one can mix choreographic programs and types, e.g., to
partially implement a part of a choreographed system and deﬁne the remaining parts
as typed parameters that the user can provide at a later stage.

Technological Layer

The technological layer comprises solutions that deal with one or more of the ele-
ments that characterise a service at the conceptual level. Figure 15.1 shows a non-

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

481

exhaustive list of these technologies, which we cover in the next sections. Since our
interest, here, is the relation of these solutions with programming languages, the
following sections do not aim at being comprehensive in covering any of the pre-
sented alternatives, but rather focus on the relevant concepts that mark one or more
of these from the point of view of language constructs, abstractions, analyses (e.g.,
type checking), and semantics (e.g., runtime).

15.2.2 Data Types

The arguments presented for data types in Chap. 8 hold also for service orientation.
What is peculiar about service orientation is that the types and values presented to
outside users usually differ from the types and values internally deﬁned and handled
by the behaviour of a service.

This discontinuity emerges from the fact that, to allow data to ﬂow between
distributed processes, we need to transform it from its internal, in-memory repre-
sentation in a service into a format amenable to transmission—with a procedure
called serialisation—and, upon reception, to translate it back—with a complemen-
tary procedure called deserialisation—into an in-memory representation. Of course,
a good data format (with its related translation procedures) should not be tied to a
speciﬁc language runtime or hardware architecture and guarantees the transfer of the
semantically-relevant elements of a given data structure among services.

To make a concrete example, if service A wants to send even a basic value, such
as an integer, to service B, it cannot do that by directly copying the bits founds in its
memory for that value. Indeed, A does not know any implementation or architectural
details of B, and it cannot reliably count on the fact that B’s memory layout could
host (let alone faithfully represent the data in) its memory layout.

As expected, these concerns appeal to the principles of loose coupling and inter-

operability of interacting, distributed processes.

Hence, when talking about the data types that characterise the operations of a
service, we essentially talk about two factors: the structure of the data in transit and
the data formats used to serialise it.

While formats vary, a common trait of many of these is that the structure of data is
akin to records with tree-like, acyclic structures—mainly dictated by the complexity
of reliably representing and (de)serialising memory references.

Technology-wise, we ﬁnd solutions generally partitioned between human-readable
and binary formats. The former serialise data into sequences of printable characters
that humans can easily read and are unambiguously parsable by machines. The latter
forgo (human) readability and encode data into strings of bits that optimise memory
occupation and/or transmission.

Here, we use as concrete examples two of the most popular human-readable
formats employed in the context of service-oriented programming: the JavaScript
Object Notation (JSON) and the Extensible Markup Language (XML).

As its acronym suggests, JSON ﬁnds its roots in JavaScript—a programming
language originally introduced for web-page scripting—, however, the format is

482

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

independent of its inspiring language, from which it draws its basic data types and
the syntax to represent structured data.

The basic data types of JSON include booleans (represented with the symbols
true and false), (double-precision, ﬂoating-point) numbers, and strings (any
sequence of UNICODE characters). Composite data structures include arrays that
are heterogeneously typed (the format does not enforce elements of arrays to have
the same type), and objects, which are collections of key-value pairs, where keys
are strings (similar to record types). As an example, we report below a relatively
complex data structure to show the mixing of composite and basic data types in
JSON structures.

{

}

" name " : " Argo " ,
" crew " : [

{ " name " : " Jason " ,
{ " name " : " H e r a c l e s " , " role " : [ " M a s t m a n " , " B a l l a s t " ] } ,
{ " n a m e " : " T i p h y s " ,
{ " name " : " A t a l a n t a " , " r o l e " : [ " P i t m a n " , " B a l l a s t " ] } ,
{ " name " : " Argos " ,

" role " : [ " S h i p w r i g h t " , " B a l l a s t " ] }

" role " : " H e l m s m a n " } ,

" role " : " C a p t a i n " } ,

] ,
" n e e d r e p a i r " : false ,
" cargo hold " : 5 ,
" cargo " : [ " goat " , " g o l d e n f l e e c e " , " dragon ’ s teeth " ]

Above, we deﬁne an object that represents a ship, whose elements are enclosed
within the outermost pair of curly brackets. Elements include the name of the ship
(a string with the characters “Argo”) and a crew array (enclosed within square
brackets) that contains a sequence of objects representing the crew members with
their name and role (either a string or an array of strings, in case the member has
more than one role on the ship).

XML adopts an even more minimalistic take on basic types than JSON: any piece
of XML data is a string of characters. However, the format gives the possibility to
developers to constrain and validate XML-formatted data through the deﬁnition of
data types carried (or referenced) within the data itself.

Much like JSON, also XML has a “father” model, as it draws inspiration from
the Standard Generalised Markup Language (SGML), a document-sharing language
standardised in the 1980s—for perspective, XML dates to 1995 and JSON to the
early 2000s.

Like JSON, also XML describes data as tree-shaped documents, where tags rep-
resent the data structure and carry within them the string-encoded data. For instance
the line < name > Argo < /name > is part of a document with a tag called name
(non-empty-element XML tags are always in the form start-tag < TAG_NAME >
end-tag < /TAG_NAME >) that carry the string value Argo. On top of this, XML
documents can carry headers that describe the formatting of custom data types,
called Data Type Deﬁnitions (DTD), which programmers can use to restrict the val-
ues that a tag can hold—e.g., by deﬁning the content of the tag as a ﬂoating point
number. For completeness, we report below a possible XML-formatted translation
of the JSON-formatted data structure shown above (notice in particular how arrays
derive from ordered repetitions of the same tag, e.g., < crew >< /crew > and
< role >< /role >).

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

483

< ship >

< name > Argo </ name >
< crew >

< name > Jason </ name > < role > C a p t a i n < / role >

</ crew >
< crew >

< name > H e r a c l e s < / name > < role > M a s t m a n < / role > < role > B a l l a s t < / role >

</ crew >
< crew >

< na me > T iphys </ name > < role > H e l m s m a n </ role >

</ crew >
< crew >

< name > A t a l a n t a < / name > < role > Pitman </ role > < role > B a l l a s t < / role >

</ crew >
< crew >

< name > Argos </ name > < role > S h i p w r i g h t </ role > < role > B a l l a s t < / role >

</ crew >
< n e e d _ r e p a i r > false </ n e e d _ r e p a i r >
< c a r g o _ h o l d >5 </ c a r g o _ h o l d >
< cargo > goat </ cargo >
< c a r g o > g o l d e n f l e e c e < / c a r g o >
< c a r g o > d r a g o n ’ s teeth </ cargo >

</ ship >

Schemas and Data Types

The fact that XML documents can carry DTDs is particularly useful in the context
of service-oriented programming to specify (in a data-format technology-speciﬁc
way) the data types expected by operations—both for validation and documenta-
tion. Indeed, XML has different so-called schema languages that, alongside DTD,
can express constraints on the structure and content of XML documents—the main
reason new schema languages evolved was to overcome the limitations of DTD spec-
iﬁcations. Similarly, also JSON acquired standards, like JSON Schema, which can
specify in a JSON-based format the structure of the expected (valid) JSON values.
For example, the piece of JSON Schema below is a possible validator for our

illustrative ship JSON structure.

{ " $ s c h e m a " : " h t t p s : // json - s c h e m a . org / d r a f t / 2 0 2 0 - 1 2 / s c h e m a " ,

" t y p e " : " o b j e c t " ,
" a d d i t i o n a l P r o p e r t i e s " : false ,
" p r o p e r t i e s " : {

" name " : { " type " : " s t r i n g " } ,
" crew " : {

" type " : " array " ,
" items " : {

" t y p e " : " o b j e c t " ,
" p r o p e r t i e s " : {

" name " : { " type " : " s t r i n g " } ,
" role " : { " oneOf " : [

{ " t y p e " : " s t r i n g " } ,
{ " type " : " array " , " items " : { " t y p e " : " s t r i n g " } }

] } } } } ,

" n e e d r e p a i r " : { " type " : " b o o l e a n " } ,
" cargo hold " : { " t y p e " : " n u m b e r " } ,
" cargo " : { " type " : " array " , " items " : { " type " : " string " }}} ,

" r e q u i r e d " : [ " name " ]

}

484

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

Without going into the details of each line, let us point out the interesting bits

from the linguistic point of view.

First, we declare the version of the $schema speciﬁcation we use to deﬁne our
validator. This is not different from using a certain version of a given language
implementation to deﬁne the types of our programs (where new versions can include
new features; e.g., the inclusion of generics since Java 5.0, cf. Sect. 10.4.2). Schema
technologies make the indication of this version explicit, so that any user of the
schema knows what version of the speciﬁcation it should be run against.

Then, we specify the type of the whole structure, which is an object (in the
case of JSON, a string-key to value mapping). The additionalProperties
key indicates whether or not to accept subtypes of the type we are deﬁning; specif-
ically, this is an interpretation of structural subtyping (cf. Sect. 8.5.2), where we
can allow valid values to have more ﬁelds/properties than the ones deﬁned in the
schema. In this case, we forbid extensions of the structure speciﬁed in the schema
(additionalProperties is set to false).

Next, we ﬁnd the properties of valid values. For instance, we specify that
the key name must correspond to a value of type string. The deﬁnition of the
properties follows the usual nesting of type deﬁnitions, e.g., we indicate that the
crew property is an array of objects, which we specify following the same
convention that JSON schema provides for objects (made of properties, etc.).
Notice that, in the deﬁnition of the objects of the crew array, we use the oneOf
operator to deﬁne a sum type (cf. Sect. 8.4.3) for the values corresponding to the
role key, which can either be strings or arrays of strings.

Lastly, we close our schema with the required key, which indicates which of
the properties must be present to consider a JSON value valid. In this case, we set
that valid values must have at least the outermost key name deﬁned—which means
that we accept any JSON value that has a valid name value and that adheres to any
combination of the deﬁnitions of the other keys in the schema (applying a reﬁnement
notion of structural subtyping).

Jolie Types

Until here in this section, we discussed data types in close relation to the technology
used to transmit the data among processes. For example, we can elect JSON as the
serialisation technology used by our service and deﬁne the type of data exchanged
in the form of a technology-speciﬁc deﬁnition: JSON schema.

However, while, we made a step towards interoperability (by ﬁxing a common
standard to exchange data), we have made a commitment against loose coupling,
as we are forcing the clients of our service to emit and parse JSON values. What if
other clients could only use some binary format or XML as serialisation technology?
Allowing these to interact with our service entails two actions; a conceptual and a
practical one. The conceptual one regards the deﬁnition of schemas (alternative to the
JSON ones, if any) to validate the formatted data, and the extension of the interface
presented by the service, which now should publish the availability of the new format,
along with the pre-existing JSON-based deﬁnitions. The practical action is, of course,

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

485

to modify our service so that it can discern the desired formatting of the data and
apply the speciﬁc procedures to translate it into/from memory.

As we have seen happening multiple times now (e.g., when we used parametric
polymorphism to avoid the tedious and error-prone task of deﬁning speciﬁc imple-
mentations of common, type-agnostic, data structures), abstraction can relieve pro-
grammers from the burden of the above routine—that one should endure every time
the service must support a new data format.

In this case, we can have the language used to deﬁne the interface of our service
abstract from the implementation details of the data-format technologies and provide
a generic schema for type deﬁnition. The underlying guarantee to that abstraction
is that the runtime of the language can either produce compliant schemas for the
various technologies supported, allowing users to decide what solution best suits
their needs, or dispense with those by implementing the same checks performed by
the validators.

Both Alternatives Have Pros and Cons.
The second can provide a schema language even when the data format does not
provide one and, as long as users can access the same data-format abstraction tech-
nology, they can use the abstract schema to produce and validate data serialised
in any of the supported data formats. Per contra, when the second option is not
applicable (e.g., because it is not available under a given technology stack), the gen-
erated, format-speciﬁc schemas would allow implementors to perform the validation
regardless of the abstraction—this implies the availability of a schema speciﬁc to the
target data format and it comes at the cost of re-generating and re-distributing the
technology-speciﬁc schemas each time the types of the service change.

To make a concrete example, let us consider Jolie types. Jolie implements the sec-
ond alternative presented above, i.e., it is a service-oriented programming language
(ﬁrst released in 2006) that provides type deﬁnitions which abstract from the data
format used in data transmission.

Jolie types deﬁne structures as data trees, quite close to the ones we saw for the
JSON and XML formats; in these trees, the root contains a value of some basic type
(boolean, integer, string, etc.) and each node points to an array of trees. A
possible Jolie data type for the JSON- and XML-based structures of the previous
examples, which also follows the semantics of the JSON schema presented above,
is the following:

type ship : {

name : s t r i n g
crew *: {

name ?: s t r i n g
role *: s t r i n g

}
n e e d _ r e p a i r ?: bool
c a r g o _ h o l d ?: int
cargo *: s t r i n g

}

486

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

The Jolie Programming Language

Jolie is an interpreted programming language designed to let developers program services in a
simple, compositional way. In this chapter, we analyse the main elements of Jolie programs (types,
interfaces, ports, services, and behaviours) and show how it provides a simple syntax for specifying
the interfaces, the ports, and the behaviour of complex distributed programs. Besides these “fun-
damental” features, the language offers advanced constructs to support programmers in building
complex distributed systems.

For instance, Jolie provides a set of architectural programming constructs that help users
build complex compositions of services through a terse syntax. Some examples of these constructs
are: “embedding”, which allows developers to run services within another, creating an efﬁcient
(e.g., communicating via internal memory) composite service (the construct is useful also because
one can “detach” embedded services from their embedder by changing a couple of lines in their
ports deﬁnitions, cf. Sect. 15.2.4); “redirection” and “aggregation”, which let programmers route
messages among services in a structured way—the main difference between redirection and aggre-
gation is that the former is known to the client, which needs to speciﬁcally state to which redirected
service it wants to interact with, while aggregation is implicit and the client does not know whether
it is interacting with an aggregator or not; “courier”, which enriches aggregation with a mechanism
to inspect and modify messages at their reception (both before forwarding requests to their target
services and before passing responses back to clients).

Another important language feature (speciﬁcally, of behaviours), is the provision of fault
handling (succinctly exempliﬁed in Sect. 15.2.5) with advanced features for ensuring that systems
operate smoothly in the face of failures. In particular, Jolie handles faults through the use of scopes.
Scopes are blocks of code that should execute together, i.e., a scope can mark a transactional section
that shall either execute in its entirety or reverted otherwise. For this purpose, the language also
provides a “termination and compensation” mechanism, where termination allows developers to
specify what should happen if an operation fails, while compensation allows them to specify actions
necessary to revert the effects of a failed operation.

The language has a strong industrial focus (e.g., its syntax recalls that of Java and C and it
supports an ever-expanding array of data formats and communication protocols) and solid academic
rooting—its initial formal foundations and implementation come from the University of Bologna
and the project is currently led by the University of Southern Denmark, with the contribution of
many international research and industrial organisations.

In the deﬁnition, we name our type ship. The root of ship is empty (void)
and it contains name, crew, need_repair, cargo_hold, and cargo as nodes.
In ship, name has the type string, and it is the only required node of the whole
structure. This is evident from the ? and * operators we ﬁnd next to the other nodes,
which indicate the cardinality of the elements in the arrays corresponding to each
node—respectively, a zero-or-one and zero-or-more cardinality, while the absence
of a cardinality speciﬁcation indicates an exactly-one requirement (like that of the
outermost name).

Interestingly, since nodes are arrays, we have a simpler deﬁnition than the one
we saw using JSON schema. Indeed, with role*: string we express the fact
that the role property of crew is optional and, if present, it can either contain a
string (i.e., the unary array) or an array of strings—alternatively, one could capture
the choice with Jolie sum types.

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

487

Another interesting point is noting the design choices on subtyping between JSON
schema and Jolie. The former adopts an “open” interpretation of the type, where one
needs to explicitly forbid the presence of additionalProperties and indicate
what elements are required. The latter follows a “closed” interpretation of types,
where defaults indicate exactly-one cardinality and subtyping is explicitly indicated,
e.g., via sum types and nodes marked as undefined (not shown here). We invite
the reader to ponder on the pros and cons of either approach as an exercise (e.g.,
from the point of view of a user that implements a service and/or a client).

As we see later in this chapter (in Sect. 15.2.4), the Jolie ports let the language
offer data-format-abstract types to its users. Indeed, users deﬁne in ports the concrete
format for receiving/transmitting data (e.g., JSON) and the Jolie runtime handles the
transformation from/to the internal representation of the data. This also includes the
validation of the data in reception/transmission, independently of the availability of
a schema language for the selected data format.

Closing on data-format-abstract types, since the Jolie runtime handles both the
validation and conversion of the data, at the moment there is no ofﬁcial support for
type-to-schema synthesis, e.g., where one generates a JSON schema given a Jolie
type—however, one can provide this support independently of the language runtime,
e.g., with dedicated tools able to translate (compile) Jolie types into target data-format
schemas.

15.2.3 Messaging Patterns

Since services are processes that communicate over some medium, besides agreeing
on the formatting of data, they need to ﬁx how they transmit invocations to each other.
The general way to deﬁne how invocation and data transmission works between
services spans three levels.

The lowest of these levels is that of communication channels, which identify the
transmission medium (e.g., a wired or wireless connection) used to transmit the data.
Examples, here, are the Ethernet and Bluetooth standards. Since the standards them-
selves have little to do with languages and, in particular, language-level abstractions,
we do not further comment on them in our treatment.

Then, we ﬁnd the communication protocols, which deﬁne how two or more parties
can exchange information over a given communication channel. The communication
protocol ﬁxes (with reference speciﬁcations that frequently represent interactions in
a way that reminds the above-all-parties abstraction of choreographies) the syntax of
the exchanged messages, their sequence among the parties, and the rules that apply
at the reception of each message, in response of the current state of the communi-
cation. For example, if during a communication one of the parties receives some
corrupted data and the used communication protocol enforces error recovery, the
protocol implementation shall spot the corrupted message and apply the rules put in
place by its speciﬁcation for that occasion—e.g., asking the sender to re-transmit the
message. Representative communications protocols are the Transport Communica-
tion Protocol (TCP) and the User Datagram Protocol (UDP). We avoid commenting

488

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

on these for the same reason as communication channels, i.e., the protocols them-
selves do not have meaningful traits to comment on in our exposition on languages,
but we mention them here because they will turn out—later in this chapter—to be
characterising elements/parameters of service deﬁnitions.

The last level is that of messaging patterns, which concerns the logic of mes-
sage exchange between the parties. While there exist many of these patterns, in the
following, we focus on the main ones (and some of their variants).

Request-Response Pattern

As mentioned in the introductory part of this chapter, in a way, we already met the
request-response (also called request-reply) pattern while presenting the stack-based
control-transfer model (cf. Chap. 7). The pattern is one of the (if not the) most ubiq-
uitous and, for instance, it describes the basic behaviour of the Web. Indeed, HTTP (a
standard that deﬁnes how processes exchange messages in hypermedia information
systems) is a request-response-based protocol that determines ways for Web browsers
to interact with Web servers and manipulate resources (generally, Web pages). Since
HTTP implements the request-response messaging pattern, all interactions between
the parties in the protocol happen in pairs of requests and responses—speciﬁcally,
the Web browser is the party that sends requests for some operations applied on
some resources and the Web server processes those requests and sends back their
responses. Notably, the pattern also dictates how errors work in HTTP, i.e., in all
instances, the server shall respond to the request of the browser, which also includes
the case of errors (via the famous 4XX and 5XX HTTP error codes, which the server
shall return, unless some communication-level errors occurred to prevent the delivery
of messages).

The request-response pattern is usually ascribed to the category of synchronous
patterns, because its logic is generally interpreted as a synchronisation between the
sender and the receiver, where the sender and the receiver both wait for each other’s
messages (where receivers and senders respectively wait for requests and responses).
However, the pattern does not necessarily imply the synchronous consumption of
both messages, but rather the fact that the communication between the two parties
entails the transmission of two pairs of messages, one in one direction and the other
in the opposite.

One-Way Pattern

Another pervasive messaging pattern is that of one-way communications, where the
sender sends a message, without waiting for a response from the receiver. Also in this
case, we can interpret one-way communications under different timings. The usual
interpretation of one-way messaging is asynchronous, so that the sender transmits
its message, ignoring the fact the receiver has consumed it—this does not exclude
the possibility to wait for an acknowledgement of the correct reception of the mes-
sage from the communication layer. The rarer, synchronous interpretation waits for
the reception of an acknowledgement of the consumption of the message from the
receiver.

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

489

Publish-Subscribe Pattern

The third main messaging pattern is the one called publish-subscribe. The distinctive
trait of this pattern is that senders and receivers do not know each other(’s locations)
and cannot directly send or receive messages between themselves. Instead, the sender,
called the publisher, of a message associates it with one or more classes of a given
classiﬁcation. The receivers of the message are those entities, called subscribers,
that expressed interest in (i.e., subscribed to) one of the classes associated with that
message. While implementations vary and can realise point-to-point semantics for
message delivery (where only one of many subscribers actually receives the pub-
lished message), the most frequent interpretation of the pattern follows a multicast
semantics, where all subscribers to a class can receive a published message asso-
ciated with that class. Advanced implementations let users deﬁne (e.g., per class)
further reﬁnements of the publish-subscribe semantics, e.g., with delivery policies.
Simplifying, the most common ones are: at-most once, where the message is sent
to subscribers only once, without any guarantee of actual reception; at-least once,
where subscribers can receive one or more copies of the same message, until they con-
ﬁrm the reception of at least one copy; exactly once, where the subscriber receives
only one copy of the message, thanks to a conﬁrmation protocol that checks the
presence of the subscriber, delivers the message, and either receives the acknowl-
edgement of its consumption or repeats the previous actions, until the reception of
the acknowledgement.

In implementations, publish-subscribe messaging frequently entails the presence
of a third entity (next to publishers and subscribers) in the form of either a message
broker or a bus. The role of this entity is to handle subscriptions and the routing
and delivery of the published messages, where more advanced brokers can apply
complex logic for the manipulation and routing of messages. For example, some
brokers (e.g., Apache Kafka) allow subscribers to deﬁne their interest classes via
some logical formula applied to each message (so, the subscription would not be
to nominal classes, but rather deﬁne some conditions that classify a message as
“interesting” for that subscriber). The Enterprise Service Bus (ESB), found in ﬁrst-
generation service-oriented architectures (cf. Sect. 15.3.1), is an advanced kind of
bus that provides features like data transformation and protocol conversion.

15.2.4 Operations and Interfaces

From the point of view of languages, we need to let services express, in their inter-
faces, what messaging patterns they expect their operations to follow. As seen for
data types, how services communicate this information to their clients vary, but we
can roughly partition these modalities into two groups: explicit and implicit.

Explicit Messaging Patterns

To let services explicitly deﬁne the messaging pattern that characterises each of their
operations, we need some language for that purpose.

490

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

An early exponent of this class of languages for service orientation is the Web
Services Description Language (WSDL); a language dating back to the year 2000
and able to deﬁne the data types (mainly as XML-typed documents), the interfaces,
and the contact points provided by the service (we analyse the latter in Sect. 15.2.4).
Since WSDL is a verbose XML-based format, we limit our example to meaningful
snippets of messaging patterns and interfaces and avoid showing the type deﬁnitions
(which follow the discipline overviewed in Sect. 15.2.2).

< i n t e r f a c e name = " P o r t I n t e r f a c e " >

< o p e r a t i o n name = " l o o k u p S h i p " p a t t e r n = " h t t p : // www . w3 . org / ns / wsdl / in - out " >

< i n p u t m e s s a g e L a b e l = " In " e l e m e n t = " t n s : s t r i n g " / >
< o u t p u t m e s s a g e L a b e l = " Out " e l e m e n t = " t n s : s h i p " / >
< fault name = " S h i p N o t D o c k e d " e l e m e n t = " t n s : s t r i n g " / >

</ o p e r a t i o n >
< o p e r a t i o n name = " dock " p a t t e r n = " h t t p : // www . w3 . org / ns / wsdl / in - only " >

< i n p u t m e s s a g e L a b e l = " In " e l e m e n t = " t n s : s h i p " / >

</ o p e r a t i o n >

< / i n t e r f a c e >

In the snippet above, we ﬁnd the deﬁnition of a PortInterface with two
operations, called lookupShip and dock. The lookupShip operation follows
a request-response pattern (in-out, in WSDL parlance) where the sender sends
in its request the name of a ship (as a string) and the service responds with a
ship data structure (e.g., the XML structure illustrated in Sect. 15.2.2). The dock
operation is a one-way one (in-only) and accepts a ship data structure—the
operation simulates the docking of a ship into a harbour. Since the lookupShip
operation simulates the fetching of the information of docked ships, we need to
communicate to the user the possible failure of the lookup, e.g., occurring when
no ship with the name requested by the client ever docked into the harbour. We
signal this possibility in the WSDL interface by associating the ShipNotDocked
fault to the lookupShip operation. For completeness, besides “in-out” and “in-
only”, WSDL provides also a consumption-acknowledged one-way, called “robust
in-only”, and a request-response with an optional response, named “in-optional-out”.
The standard also deﬁnes complementaries of the aforementioned patterns (for a total
of 8), which one can use to describe the complementary interface of the other party
in the interaction.

As an additional (and possibly easier-to-read) example, let us look at an alternative

version of the above interface, written in Jolie.

i n t e r f a c e P o r t I n t e r f a c e {

r e q u e s t R e s p o n s e : l o o k u p S h i p ( s t r i n g )( ship ) t h r o w s S h i p N o t D o c k e d ( s t r i n g )
o n e W a y : dock ( ship )

}

In the previous snippet, we use the Jolie interface keyword to deﬁne our
PortInterface, which contains the two operations seen in the WSDL example:
lookupShip, which is a requestResponse that can throw a ShipNotDocked
fault, and the oneWay dock. At the moment, requestResponses and oneWays
are the only messaging patterns supported by the language, totalling to four when
considering their complementaries, called respectively “notiﬁcation” and “solicit-

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

491

response”, that the language infers from the association of interfaces and ports,
discussed in Sect. 15.2.4.

Implicit Messaging Patterns

The implicit way of specifying the messaging patterns of an interface (and the oper-
ations therein) is an approach similar to deﬁning the data types of (the operations
of) a service in a speciﬁc data format: we pick a technology that ﬁxes the messaging
pattern of the operations it supports and we use it to deﬁne the interface of the service.
A ubiquitous example of this kind of deﬁnitions is the Representational State
Transfer (REST) architectural style. The original proposal for REST (by Roy Field-
ing, who worked on the HTTP1.1 standard at the turn of the millennium) came as a
way to describe a given service interface—also called its Application Programming
Interface (API)—using Uniform Resource Locations (URLs), the HTTP methods
(GET, POST, PUT, etc.), and an HTTP-supported data format (e.g., URL encoding,
JSON, XML). The intent of the proposal was to provide a way for developers to
take advantage of the existing Internet infrastructure (e.g., caching idempotent oper-
ations, transparent proxying) when developing services aligned with the use case of
HTTP (e.g., for hypermedia data transfers that obey the same constraints of HTTP).
Notwithstanding its proponent’s intentions, REST has been generally adopted for
the speciﬁcation of service interfaces, mainly as a much simpler replacement to the
complexity of SOAP—Simple Object Access Protocol; a (ironically, given its name)
sophisticated messaging protocol based on XML and HTTP that encompasses data
types and interface deﬁnitions, message delivery, and the peers’ topology (the pro-
tocol later inspired the deﬁnition of WSDL, dedicated only to interface-and-access
speciﬁcation). By deﬁning a service (interface) as “RESTful”—so called because it
follows the constraints dictated by the REST style—the developer not only implicitly
makes a set of technology commitments (e.g., on the usage of HTTP) but they also
declare that the operations correspond to the HTTP methods and, by deﬁnition of
the standard, that they all follow a request-response pattern.

Similar to format-speciﬁc and format-abstract data type deﬁnitions, messaging-
pattern deﬁnitions show an abstraction property between explicit and implicit ones.
For example, given an abstract WSDL or Jolie interface, we can specify a service
implementation that offers a RESTful version of the abstract one by using the HTTP
stack as the communication protocol and, if needed, by mapping operations to HTTP
methods and resources (as we do in Sect. 15.2.4). While adapting a RESTful interface
to other technologies is possible (e.g., via a middle service that translates requests
from one format to the other, similar to what ESBs do as part of their protocol
mediation functionalities), the style does not provide messaging-pattern information
and has no standard way to express other patterns than the request-response one.

Even though REST increments the coupling among services (which need to all
“speak” REST to interact with each other) its simplicity largely won over more
complex alternatives, and, at the time of writing, it is one of the major styles to
deﬁne a service interface—so much so that, e.g., the Constrained Application Pro-
tocol (CoAP), a widely-adopted communication protocol for low-power, resource-
constrained devices, follows the HTTP model with the declared purpose of offering
direct support (i.e., coupling) to and integration with RESTful services.

492

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

Bindings and Ports

By now, the reader might have acquired the sense that, when specifying service
interfaces, we have two main options.

The ﬁrst, more concrete, is to directly describe interfaces in terms of the actual
technologies used to implement the communication (e.g., by choosing the JSON data
format, possibly deﬁne types with the JSON Schema, and describe the operations in
a RESTful style).

The second alternative, more abstract (and loosely coupled), is to use language
constructs that let us deﬁne the interfaces independently of the actual technologies
that characterise a service implementation (e.g., using Jolie types and interfaces).
Like any abstraction, we need to complement it with constructs that let us express
how to ground them, i.e., to specify what technologies we want to use to implement
the interfaces. These constructs correspond to (a) a binding or mapping of interfaces
to a concrete combination of data format and communication technologies and (b)
the details of a speciﬁc port for the binding, which practically determines how users
can reach the service, e.g., the network address of the service, the information to
connect to a bus/message broker, etc.

In WSDL, the designers chose to allow for an even more ﬁne-grained separation
between interfaces, bindings, and ports (called endpoints in recent versions of the
language), through the introduction of the optional construct of port types, which
collect sets of interfaces under the same port name. However, to describe a WSDL
service, it is sufﬁcient to (i) deﬁne a binding of a port to a pair of concrete data
format and communication technology; (ii) specify a port that completes the binding
with technology-speciﬁc information to expose the service to users. Thus, a WSDL
service results from a collection of ports, which expose some collection of interfaces
over a possibly heterogeneous set of endpoints (using different data format and
communication technologies).

For

instance, we can complete our “Harbour” example with a WSDL
< service > that exposes the PortInteface (cf. Sect. 15.2.4) as a RESTful
service.

< b i n d i n g name = " H t t p B i n d i n g " i n t e r f a c e = " t n s : P o r t I n t e r f a c e "

type = " http: // www . w3 . org / ns / wsdl / http " >
< o p e r a t i o n ref = " t n s : d o c k " h t t p : m e t h o d = " POST " >

< input > < m i m e : c o n t e n t type = " a p p l i c a t i o n / xml " </ input >

</ o p e r a t i o n >
< o p e r a t i o n ref = " t n s : l o o k u p S h i p " h t t p : m e t h o d = " GET " >

< input > < m i m e : c o n t e n t type = " a p p l i c a t i o n / xml " </ input >
< o u t p u t > < m i m e : c o n t e n t type = " a p p l i c a t i o n / xml " </ output >

</ o p e r a t i o n >

< / b i n d i n g >

< s e r v i c e name = " H a r b o u r " i n t e r f a c e = " t n s : P o r t I n t e r f a c e " >
< port name = " R e s t E n d p o i n t "

b i n d i n g = " t n s : H t t p B i n d i n g "
a d d r e s s = " h t t p : // www . i o l c u s . com / h a r b o u r " / >

< / s e r v i c e >

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

493

In the snippet above, note that the HTTP binding does more than just specifying the
technology used to realise the interface. Indeed, the binding also maps the operations
to HTTP resources, available through speciﬁc HTTP methods, and it indicates the
format of the exchanged data (xml). Speciﬁcally, since dock receives some new
information, we map it to a POST (the method indicates both the submission of some
data to the resource and a possible change in the state of the recipient), while we
map lookupShip to a GET (a request for data retrieval).

The paradigm of bindings and ports for abstract interfaces carries also to Jolie,
although with a couple of different design choices with respect to WSDL. First (as
noted in Sect. 15.2.4), WSDL declares in its interfaces both the messaging pattern
(e.g., one-way) and the direction of the communication (e.g., “in-only” or “out-only”,
depending on whether the service shall respectively receive or send the one-way
message). In Jolie, interfaces only indicate the messaging pattern, while it is the kind
of port the interfaces are bound to that determines the direction of the communication.
For example, we can deﬁne in Jolie an equivalent endpoint to the one above in the
following way

i n p u t P o r t H T T P p o r t {

l o c a t i o n : " s o c k e t : // www . i o l c u s . c o m : 8 0 / h a r b o u r "
p r o t o c o l : http {
osc . dock . method
osc . l o o k u p S h i p . m e t h o d = " get "
f o r m a t = " xml "

= " post "

}
i n t e r f a c e s : P o r t I n t e r f a c e

}

where, by deﬁning an inputPort, we indicate that the service exposes the
PortInterface as inbound operations. Indeed, Jolie provides two types of ports:
inputPorts and outputPorts, respectively indicating that the operations found
in the collection of interfaces (where one can specify a comma-separated list
of interface names) associated with that port are inbound or outbound.

The second difference with WSDL is that Jolie ports integrate the concept
of bindings by including the deﬁnition of a location and a protocol. The
location indicates both the medium and transport protocol used by the port.
In the example above, the preﬁx socket:// speciﬁes the usage of a TCP
socket over the Internet Protocol (IP) that accepts connections at the address
www.iolcus.com/harbour on the traditional HTTP-server port 80—WSDL
partially omits this element by assuming a TCP/IP stack for HTTP bindings. The
protocol of a port deﬁnes the communication and data-format technologies for
message exchange. In the example, we indicate http as the communication proto-
col, specifying (like in WSDL) the HTTP methods that the operations of the interface
map to and that the format of the exchanged data is xml. The orthogonal take of Jolie
with ports and interfaces makes it easy to change how a service exposes its opera-
tions. For example, we could change the location to "btl2cap://..." and
let the service communicate via the bluetooth medium. Similarly, we can modify the
protocol parameter to support other ways in which the service expects to receive
and responds to requests. For instance, we can switch from the generic http pro-

494

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

tocol to the more speciﬁc jsonrpc or xmlrpc ones (which use HTTP but deﬁne
standards for operations and data in either data format) or, to save bandwidth, the
sodep binary format. In all these cases, these changes do not affect interfaces (and,
as we are going to see, behaviours), which do not vary.

15.2.5 Behaviour

Orchestration

As presented in the introductory sections of this chapter, orchestration is the most
established and used paradigm for behaviour deﬁnition in service-oriented program-
ming. We can attribute its appeal to two facts. First, the approach is a natural extension
to distributed systems of sequential programming (i.e., the one we presented and dis-
cussed until Chap. 14, on concurrency). Second, as we see in the next section, the
complementary approach, on choreography, has yet to ﬁnd an established interpre-
tation, which is still an active research topic.

Orchestration lets programmers design and reason on the logic of (concurrent)
distributed programs in a simple way, which might also help to avoid deadlocks
(cf. Sect. 14.5.3). The orchestrator conﬁnes in one place the coordination logic of
the distributed system, while the other participants are reactive components that
can always respond to invocations to any of their offered operations. Drawing a
parallel, we can compare the orchestration paradigm to sequential programming,
where the orchestrator represents the “main” execution block of the program that
calls the operations of the other modules, necessary to complete the block’s task.
This also means that, using orchestration languages, programmers do not need to
learn from scratch a paradigm for service orientation, and they can rather build upon
the knowledge and experience they gained with other paradigms.

We can examine the above observations on orchestration from a practical point of
view: as shown in the next sections, we do not necessarily need a service-oriented
language to deﬁne the behaviour of an orchestrated service-oriented program. For
example, we see how one can deﬁne some clever mappings to close the abstraction
gap between object- and service-orchestration and use an object-oriented language
(e.g., Java) to program an orchestration service.

However, building services using a language not built upon the service-oriented
paradigm brings complications, such as making it difﬁcult to identify and reason
on the conceptual elements that characterise a service. Indeed, what we do is map-
ping elements of the (non-service-oriented) implementation language to elements
of the service-oriented program, e.g., we map some objects/classes to data/types,
other objects to services and some of their methods to operations (with their speciﬁc
messaging patterns) and endpoints. Essentially, we are fragmenting the interface of
the service over many components, making it difﬁcult for programmers to gain an
overview of the actual interface that the service ends up exposing (this is sometimes
relieved with tools that can statically analyse the codebase and assemble the pro-
grammed interface using one of the styles and/or languages seen in the previous
sections). Moreover, programming in a different paradigm than service orientation

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

495

can lead developers to also scatter the logic of orchestration over multiple non-service
components, making it difﬁcult to follow its steps or reuse the implementation in
other codebases (e.g., due to the common problem of object-oriented languages
where e.g., a class comes with dependencies that the user needs to also import if they
want to use it2 ).

These limitations (already apparent with the introduction of remote procedure
calls) motivated the introduction of service-oriented languages for the programming
of service behaviours, where all interacting entities are services.

In the remainder of the section, we ﬁrst provide an illustrative (snippet of) a service
that implements our “Harbour” interface and of an orchestrator that calls the opera-
tions of the Harbour service. To do this, we use Java and a dedicated framework that
exploits annotations to conventionally conﬁgure the many technical details of inter-
face speciﬁcation and instantiation. Then, we brieﬂy introduce the Business Process
Execution Language (BPEL) and Jolie behaviours as two example service-oriented
orchestration languages. We highlight the distinctive service-oriented features of this
class of languages, and we illustrate their usage by translating our Java services into
Jolie ones.

Behaviour in Java

To exemplify how one can use an object-oriented language to implement services
in orchestration, we consider Java and the (at the time of writing) widely popular
Spring framework, ﬁrst introduced in 2003.

A Simple Orchestrator

Let us begin by looking at a possible implementation of the Harbour service, reported
below.

@ R e s t C o n t r o l l e r
p u b l i c c l a s s H a r b o u r {
@ P o s t M a p p i n g ( " / dock " )
void dock ( @ R e q u e s t B o d y Ship ship ) {

ships . add ( ship );

}
@ G e t M a p p i n g ( " / l o o k u p S h i p /{ name } " )
Ship l o o k u p S h i p ( @ P a t h V a r i a b l e S t r i n g name )

t h r o w s S h i p N o t D o c k e d {

r e t u r n ships . f i n d B y N a m e ( name );

}

}

An interesting point, from a linguistic perspective,

is the usage of Java
annotations—the @-notation found in the code above, which annotate the symbol
found on their right—for the mapping. In the snippet, we declare that the Harbour

2 Joe Armstrong, the principal inventor of the Erlang language, was quoted as quipping about object-
oriented modularity: “You wanted a banana but what you got was a gorilla holding the banana and
the entire jungle”.

496

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

class is a @RestController. To the Spring runtime, this means that it shall con-
sider the (annotated) methods of this class as operations of a RESTful service, avail-
able at some TCP/IP location (omitted here). Moreover, the annotation also entails the
(possible) automatic (de)serialisation between some conﬁgured data format (here,
JSON, by default) and Java objects. In the code, we map the dock object method to
the HTTP POST (@PostMapping) method invoked on the /dock HTTP resource.
The @RequestBody annotation indicates that the invocation should carry a value,
which should comply with the deﬁnition of the Ship object (also omitted here—we
leave the possible translation as Java classes of the ship data structure illustrated
in Sect. 15.2.2 as an exercise to the reader). The Spring runtime takes care of dese-
rialising the JSON value of the request into a Ship object, expected by the dock
method. In the body of the method, we ﬁnd the effect of the invocation: we add to
the ships object (a repository-like data structure) the ship we obtained from the
invocation. The deﬁnition of the lookupShip operation follows a similar logic. In
this case, we indicate the usage of the GET (@GetMapping) HTTP method, and
we map the invocation on a resource address parametric to the request value, i.e.,
we preﬁx any invocation to the lookupShip operation with the /lookupShip
fragment and let the request variable name be the parameter of the address (as indi-
cated by the @PathVariable annotation). Since we return a Ship object, the
Spring runtime also performs the opposite work it did for the dock operation, i.e.,
it also serialises a Java object into a JSON one, sent back as the response. Note that,
although not explicit from the syntax of the annotation, the framework translates any
value a method can “output”; in this case, the values correspond to either (i.e., the
sum type of) the declared return type (Ship) and the “fault” ShipNotDocked—
more precisely, the values would map respectively to a success and an error HTTP
response.

Considering loose coupling and interoperability, this solution (although fragment-
ing the service elements over different modules) satisﬁes both principles. Annotations
represent mappings that allow the Java code to abstract from the implementation of
the caller/callee (loose coupling) and one can change the technologies used by the
service without necessarily modifying the behaviour (interoperability).

However, the service we exempliﬁed above is the simplest form of orchestrator,
i.e., one that does not need to coordinate other services to implement the distributed
logic of the system. Unfortunately, looking at a more complex scenario reveals that
the support for interoperability and loose coupling given by this class of solutions
becomes less satisfactory.

Orchestrating Services

Let us consider a richer scenario, where we have several Harbour services, i.e.,
possibly different implementations of the same Harbour service interface, and a “Port
Authority” orchestrator that interacts with these to coordinate inter-port operations.
For simplicity, we ﬁx the number of Harbour services to three and consider only one
search request-response operation implemented by the Port Authority service.
With search, the service receives the name of a ship (a string), and it interacts with

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

497

other services to see whether a ship with that name ever docked at one of the Harbours.
In case all Harbours miss that entry, the service responds with a ship-not-found fault.
Notice that the behaviour we just described does not specify how the interactions
with the Harbour services happen. Are those sequential and, in case, following what
order? Are they performed in a fork-join fashion?3 For this Java example, we limit
ourselves to looking at the simpler sequential version, as the parallel one would
involve the more complex programming of threads (cf. Sect. 14.7).

@ R e s t C o n t r o l l e r
p u b l i c c l a s s P o r t A u t h o r i t y {

Optional < Ship > l o o k u p A t H a r b o u r ( S t r i n g address , S t r i n g name ) {
r e t u r n W e b C l i e n t . c r e a t e ( a d d r e s s )

. get ()
. uri ( " / l o o k u p S h i p / " + name )
. r e t r i e v e ()
. b o d y T o M o n o ( Ship . c l a s s )
. o n E r r o r R e s u m e ( e -> Mono . empty () )
. b l o c k O p t i o n a l ();

}

@ G e t M a p p i n g ( " / s e a r c h /{ name } " )
Ship s e a r c h ( @ P a t h V a r i a b l e S t r i n g name ) t h r o w s S h i p N o t D o c k e d {
r e t u r n l o o k u p A t H a r b o u r ( " http :// h a r b o u r 1 . com " , name )

. o r E l s e ( l o o k u p A t H a r b o u r ( " http :// h a r b o u r 2 . com " , name )
. o r E l s e ( l o o k u p A t H a r b o u r ( " http :// h a r b o u r 3 . com " , name )
. o r E l s e T h r o w ( S h i p N o t D o c k e d :: new ) ) );

}

}

Above, we use the Java Optional < T > type—a parametric type that encap-
sulates a possible value and provides operations to check its presence and to
obtain it—to express in a succinct way the logic of the orchestration, contained
within the search method. In the method, ﬁrst, we perform a lookup at the ﬁrst
Harbour service (with address http://harbour1.com). To do this, we call
the lookupAtHarbour method, which returns an Optional < Ship >.
The Optional < T > type provides the orElse method that either returns
the value wrapped in the Optional, if present, or it allows us to run some
code. Here, we exploit the orElse method to call the second and third Harbour
services in sequence (with respective addresses http://harbour2.com and
http://harbour3.com). If none of the invocations provided a value, we throw
a ShipNotDocked to the caller (the framework translates it into an HTTP error)
with the orElseThrow method—which throws an exception in case of an empty
Optional.

The lookupAtHarbour method uses the WebClient provided by the Spring
framework to implement the call to the REST interface of the Harbour(s) (the
lookupShip operation, in particular), retrieve the response, and convert it into
the Optional value illustrated above.

The main takeaway from the example above is that the discontinuity and lim-
itations of the mapping to services become more evident as the complexity of the

3 In a way that each invocation executes in a parallel branch and they eventually join the main branch
to resume sequential execution.

498

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

logic of the interaction grows. In particular, while in the Harbour implementation the
Java code remained relatively independent of the annotations that bridged between
services and the objects, here, we have the “service code” (e.g., the one needed to per-
form the connection to a service or the invocation of an operation) leak into the code
of the Java classes. This kind of implementation marks a strong commitment that
increases the coupling between the behaviour of the orchestrator and the communi-
cation technologies that the invoked services adopt. This approach also undermines
interoperability, since changing or including different communication technology
stacks likely requires the rewriting of large portions of the orchestrator.

BPEL and Jolie Behaviours

The name “BPEL” does not exactly identify a language, and it rather indicates a
family of close dialects (e.g., BPEL4WS, OASIS WS-BPEL, Oracle BPEL) united
by the same XML-based syntax and constructs, whilst not strictly adhering to the
same semantics (i.e., the same BPEL program executed on different BPEL runtimes
can have slightly dissimilar behaviours).

The relevant trait of the BPEL (family of) language(s) is that it describes pro-
grams in terms of inbound receptions and orchestrations (called business processes)
of external entities. Hence, the language is service-oriented in the sense that a BPEL
program describes the behaviour of a service (an orchestrator) and every other entity
the program can interact with is a service as well. More speciﬁcally, BPEL uses
WSDL descriptors to obtain the deﬁnition of both the operations it needs to imple-
ment (the inbound requests) and the interfaces and ports of the services it shall
orchestrate to complete some task.

Jolie behaviours follow a similar take. They are compositions of inbound actions
and of invocations to external services, deﬁned by the inputPorts and the
outputPorts of the service (which, in turn, specify the interfaces expected
and offered by the service).

To make things more concrete, let us see a possible transposition of the Java code

we wrote earlier as Jolie services.

A Simple Orchestrator

s e r v i c e H a r b o u r {

i n p u t P o r t H T T P p o r t { /* ... */ }
o u t p u t P o r t Ships { /* ... */ }

e x e c u t i o n { c o n c u r r e n t }

main {

[ dock ( ship ) ]{

a d d @ S h i p s ( ship )

}
[ l o o k u p S h i p ( name )( ship ){

i n s t a l l ( d e f a u l t = > throw ( S h i p N o t D o c k e d , name ) )
f i n d B y N a m e @ S h i p s ( name )( ship )

} ]

}

}

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

499

Notice that, in the code above, we use the HTTPport deﬁned in Sect. 15.2.4.
Then, we choose to orchestrate a sub-service, bound by the outputPort Ships,
which implements an interface (omitted here) similar to the one we saw for the
ships objects in our Java example. The important difference with our Java example
is that, here, there is no discontinuity determined by the passage between services
and objects. Indeed, Ships is itself a service which our Harbour service orchestrates
to store and retrieve information on ships.4

Above, the main {...} block indicates the entry point of execution of the
behaviour of the service (like the traditional main procedure/method found in C
or Java programs). Within the main block, we ﬁnd the dock and lookupShip
operations composed using a guarded choice.

To explain how guarded choices work, let us assume three one-way operations

(for simplicity) a, b, and c. Then, the code

[ a () ]{ /* Ba */ }[ b () ]{ /* Bb */ }[ c () ]{ /* Bc */ }

means “wait to either receive an invocation on a, b or c, execute the continuation
within the associated block (Ba for a, Bb for b or Bc for c), and discard the other
branches (e.g., if a is invoked, we would discard the b and c branches)”. Note that
in our example, the lookupShip branch misses the trailing {...} block. This is
a contracted form of the guarded-choice operator for empty continuations—mind to
not confuse the block within the square brackets (explained later) for the continuation.
Before returning to describe the behaviour found in the body of the main block,
notice the execution {concurrent} instruction between the ports and the
main block. This instruction speciﬁes how the Jolie runtime shall handle the instan-
tiation of this service. Since services can hold state, service instantiation is similar to
object instantiation: we want to specify if/when to create a new instance to manage
distinct pools of data. In object orientation, we traditionally ﬁnd constructs such as
new, called from some other object’s context in the same runtime. Differently, in
service orientation the requester of the instantiation is necessarily a component that is
outside the service runtime and, thus, we need to indicate which operations are avail-
able to start a new instance of a service. In our Java example, this was implicit in the
creation of the RestController object. Jolie makes the logic of service instan-
tiation explicit through the interaction between the execution instruction and the
behaviour. The former indicates how the runtime shall create new instances of the
service, following three modalities: single, sequential, and concurrent.
The ﬁrst creates a single instance of the service which, once it reaches its last instruc-
tion, terminates. The second and third modalities can create an unbound number of
instances of the same service, with the difference that the second waits for the pre-
ceding instance to ﬁnish before starting, while the third does not. Since the latter

4 One possibility is to implement the Ships service in Jolie, using in its behaviour the basic data
manipulation primitives provided by the language. Alternatively, Jolie supports delegating the imple-
mentation of operations to other languages (e.g., Java, JavaScript) through the embed command.
This essentially allows us to map service operations to methods/functions without mixing the two
paradigms in the same code artefact.

500

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

two modalities can start a new instance of a service from an invocation of a client,5
they interact with the behaviour to deﬁne which of the operations in the service’s
interface can start a new instance. Speciﬁcally, all input operations at the top of the
main block can instantiate a new copy of the service, while the others are accessible
within a running instance.6

In our example, both the dock and lookupShip operations are top-level inputs
and, thus, either invocation can start a new instance of the service. Since we declare
the execution of the service concurrent, all instances run in parallel.

In the two branches, the dock operation orchestrates the invocation of the add
operation at the Ships service. The code for service invocation uses the syntax o@S,
where o is the operation label and S is the name of the outputPort binding the
invoked service. The syntax for requestResponses and oneWays seen for inter-
faces carries to Jolie behaviours both in inputs and outputs (the latter, adding the @S
binding). We brieﬂy focus on the particular case of inbound requestResponses,
like lookupShip, where the ﬁrst pair of parentheses encloses the variable holding
the content of the request (e.g., name) and the second pair wraps the variable (ship)
that carries the response to the invoker. At runtime, inbound request-responses follow
the steps: receive the invocation, execute until the completion of the code within the
associated block {...}, evaluate the response. Hence, in our code, the invocation
of the lookupShip operation stores in the name variable the value of the request.
Then, it invokes the Ships service to retrieve the data, which stores its response in
the ships variable. Since this is the last instruction in the block, the lookupShip
operation sends back its response, which is the content of the ships variable. The
install instruction found within the same block indicates the instantiation of a
fault handler. In this case, we use the generic default label to target all possible
errors generated by the findByName operation and report (throw) the problem
back to the invoker as a ShipNotDocked fault (in place of a valid ship value, as
per PortInterface).

Orchestrating Services

Although we already saw service orchestration in the previous example, let us com-
plete our comparison with the previous Java example by presenting an alternative
version of the Port Authority in Jolie.

In particular, we have the Port Authority invoke the three Harbours of the exam-
ple in parallel. This allows us to see other two Jolie behaviour composition opera-
tors (besides the guarded-choice commented above): the parallel | (reminder of the
parallel composition operator seen in Sect. 14.6.1) and the sequence ; one (the latter

5 Also the single modality starts a (single) new instance, but, since the instantiation happens at
the start of the service, there is no need to wait for an invocation from a client to do it.
6 The service-oriented way of handling request-to-instance correlation is via (data) correlation sets,
i.e., a technique whereby request messages contain speciﬁc parts that the invoked service can use
to ﬁnd the instance that message is intended for. While also this matter would deserve a “language”
treatment (on how it can impact types, interfaces, and behaviours), we avoid to cover also this part
and keep our presentation focussed on the fundamental elements of the paradigm.

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

501

is the default one when the programmer omits to specify a composition operator and
just separates instructions with a new line).

s e r v i c e P o r t A u t h o r i t y {

o u t p u t P o r t H a r b o u r 1 { /* ... */ }
o u t p u t P o r t H a r b o u r 2 { /* ... */ }
o u t p u t P o r t H a r b o u r 3 { /* ... */ }
i n p u t P o r t in { /* ... */ }

d e f i n e f a u l t H a n d l e r {

i n s t a l l ( d e f a u l t = > skip )

}

main {
s e a r c h ( n a m e )( ship ){

{

scope ( h1 ){ f a u l t H a n d l e r ; l o o k u p S h i p @ H a r b o u r 1 ( name )( ship )}
| scope ( h2 ){ f a u l t H a n d l e r ; l o o k u p S h i p @ H a r b o u r 2 ( name )( ship )}
| scope ( h3 ){ f a u l t H a n d l e r ; l o o k u p S h i p @ H a r b o u r 3 ( name )( ship )}
}
if ( ! i s _ d e f i n e d ( ship ) )
throw ( S h i p N o t D o c k e d , name )
}

}

}

Starting from the bindings, the Authority Port service has three outputPorts,
one for each Harbour it interacts with, and an inputPort (in) to receive search
requests from its clients.

At invocation, the orchestrator calls in parallel the three Harbours. This is visi-
ble from the composition ... | ... | ... at the beginning of the search
request-response block. We use blocks for each invocation because we want ﬁrst
to install a separate fault handler for each lookup request and then perform the
related request. The three blocks execute in parallel, but the instructions therein
follow the order: ﬁrst, install the handler and then, perform the invocation. Since
we handle faults in the same way for any invocation, we define a procedure,
named faultHandler, which contains the fault-handling logic—we associate
each (default) handler with a procedure, named skip (omitted), that discards
the fault—and we call faultHandler from inside the blocks. We preﬁx each block
with a scope, e.g., scope(h1){...}, to specify that we manage the fault thrown
by a Harbour within its containing block. Besides fault handling, we use blocks to
explicitly indicate the precedence among the composition operators. Another exam-
ple of this way of specifying the composition of instructions is the outer block that
wraps the three inner ones put in parallel. In this case, we are indicating that the three
blocks shall all fully run, after which we can proceed with the code following the
outer block (which also serves as an example of a fork-join composition).

Before moving to the last lines, we notice a detail; Jolie variables have module
scope. While in block-scoped languages (e.g., C, Java) variables are valid within
the block where they are declared, in module-scoped languages the scope of a name
binding is the module (in this case, the service) that contains them. This means, e.g.,
that the ships found in the three lookupShip invocations in the example refer

502

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

to the same variable, which each might overwrite (more on this at the end of the
section).

Completing the example, we check that at least one of the Harbours returned a
valid ship value (i.e., the invocations assigned to it a value) using the is_defined
predicate. If false, we throw a ShipNotDocked fault.

As a ﬁnal remark, we invite the reader to ponder on the two ways we composed
the invocations of the Harbour services and what that entails from the point of view
of the distributed logic of the composition.

In the Java example, we followed a sequential, conditional composition. If the ﬁrst
Harbour returned a valid response, we would avoid querying the other Harbours.
Thus, we would consider the ﬁrst “good” response as valid and skip any further
invocation. This imposes a ranking among the Harbours. Even if the second Harbour
had an entry for the searched ship, if the ﬁrst Harbour responded with a valid value,
our orchestrator would consider it the only valid one (and the same goes between
the second and third Harbours, when the ﬁrst misses an entry for the searched ship
and both of the former have a valid one).

Instead, in the Jolie example, we query the three Harbours in parallel and store
their responses within the same ship variable. What could happen at runtime is
that one of the Harbours responds ﬁrst and sets the content of the ship variable,
followed by the response of a second one, which overwrites the content of ship set
by the ﬁrst one.7 The behaviour we specify is that the last Harbour to respond with
a valid value is also the one that last sets the ship variable, which is then used to
respond back to the user. Hence, in this case, it is not the programmer who deﬁned
the precedence among the Harbours, instead determined by the response times of
the Harbours and the non-determinism of the parallel invocations.

In general, more advanced approaches exist, usually referred to as composition
or workﬂow patterns, which constitute a suite to compare the expressiveness and
ergonomics of different orchestration languages—in our case, alternatives are invok-
ing all Harbours in parallel, waiting for the ﬁrst valid response, and discarding the
others or querying all the Harbours (in sequence or parallel) and successfully respond-
ing only if they all have compatible entries of the same ship.

Choreographies

As presented in the introductory sections of this chapter, in service-oriented pro-
gramming, we tend to cast orchestration and choreographies in a dual relationship.
While this can hold from a conceptual point of view—contrasting the central-point-
of-control approach of orchestration against the distributed-coordination-logic of
choreographies—it is more difﬁcult to draw clear-cut parallels between the existing
interpretations of the choreographic approach and orchestration.

Indeed, orchestration has a consolidated understanding, both among theoreticians
and practitioners, as a style of programming distributed (service-oriented) systems.

7 The Jolie runtime treats variable assignments atomically, so these are always linearised (in a
non-deterministic way) and it cannot happen that, e.g., the ship variable contains a “mix” of two
responses received in parallel.

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

503

Contrarily, it is more difﬁcult to ﬁnd an agreement on what could be the “mainstream”
interpretation of choreographies. We can trace at least three main lines of work
(which can also intersect) that found their roots in different interpretations of what a
choreography is and from which derive different tools that programmers can use in
the development of choreographic service-oriented programs. These interpretations
see choreographies as either a speciﬁcation, a (behavioural) type, or a program. The
latter is the closest interpretation we can frame as dual to orchestration, but any of
these has yet to gain wide adoption in service-oriented programming.

Choreographies as Speciﬁcations

The earliest interpretation of choreographies in the context of service orientation is
that of understanding and using these tools for designing and specifying the behaviour
of a distributed program.

This category includes also (typically diagrammatic) languages that predate ser-
vice orientation, like the mentioned Alice-and-Bob notation as well as sequence
diagrams. Since these tools are ubiquitously used in the design and speciﬁcation
of protocols and distributed components, we could say that the “speciﬁcation” is
the most common interpretation of choreographies. However, here, we focus on the
languages purposefully introduced for service orientation.

The most famous service-oriented language in this category is the Web Service
Choreography Description Language (WS-CDL). Quoting its W3C Candidate Rec-
ommendation (CR), “[WS-CDL] is an XML-based language that describes peer-to-
peer collaborations of participants by deﬁning, from a global viewpoint, their com-
mon and complementary observable behaviour; where ordered message exchanges
result in accomplishing a common business goal”. The CR further speciﬁes that
WS-CDL is not an “executable business process description language” or an imple-
mentation language, leaving the task of specifying the execution logic of applications
to other languages (e.g., BPEL, Java, etc.).

The main elements of a WS-CDL choreography are:

(cid:129) the types of the data exchanged in the distributed program;
(cid:129) the participants that exchange the data, which impersonate a certain role in the

choreography;

(cid:129) the channels that connect the participants, specifying where and how to exchange

the data;

(cid:129) the interactions (or data exchanges) that can occur in the distributed program.

Like BPEL, also WS-CDL integrates with other WS-* technologies, above all
WSDL, which can deﬁne types, operations, and bindings, to a given WS-CDL
choreography. Here, since the language is quite verbose, we illustrate the shape
of a WS-CDL choreography using a pseudo-language inspired by the latter.

c h o r e o g r a p h y H a b o u r C h o r e o g r a p h y {

/* ... */
type ship { /* ... */ }
type S h i p N o t D o c k e d e x t e n d s Fault

504

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

roles : Client , H a r b o u r
c h a n n e l chan {

o n e W a y : dock ( ship )
r e q u e s t R e s p o n s e : l o o k u p S h i p ( s t r i n g )( ship ) t h r o w s S h i p N o t D o c k e d

}
main {

/* ... */
if ( C l i e n t . a c t i o n == " dock " ){

chan . dock : C l i e n t . s h i p - > H a r b o u r . ship

} else {

chan . l o o k u p S h i p : C l i e n t . name -> H a r b o u r . name
try {

H a r b o u r . ship = H a r b o u r . f i n d B y N a m e ( name )
chan . l o o k u p S h i p _ : H a r b o u r . ship -> C l i e n t . s h i p

} catch ( S h i p N o t D o c k e d ){

chan . l o o k u p S h i p _ : H a r b o u r . S h i p N o t D o c k e d -> C l i e n t

}

}}

}

In the example, the main entity of our language is the choreography. The fact
that we give it a name, HabourChoreography, signals that choreographies are
the modules of our language, which we can assemble, import, and use within other
modules (we leave out choreography modularity in our simple examples).

For brevity, we borrow Jolie data types for our pseudo-language (e.g., the ship
type saw in Sect. 15.2.2) and use subtyping for Java-like fault handling (e.g.,
ShipNotDocked subtype of Fault). Then, we list the roles in our choreography—
a Client and the Harbour—and we specify the channels we are going to use
in the choreography. The attentive readers might have already drawn the paral-
lel between channels and interfaces. Indeed, channels specify the kind (e.g.,
oneWay, requestResponse, also borrowed from Jolie for this example) of oper-
ations and the involved data types of the possible interactions among the roles.

Finally, we have the speciﬁcation of the global-viewpoint behaviour among the
roles. In the example, we deﬁne a main block where we see a branching behaviour,
represented by the if on the action variable of the Client. This means that it is
the Client who decides what to do next, communicating that decision to the other
participants (here, only the Harbour).

While conditionals and branching are traditional elements of local programming,
these assume a more nuanced connotation in choreographies, known as the knowl-
edge of choice. Indeed, in a local program, the branching regards only one process,
which both evaluates the condition and unfolds the computation accordingly. On the
contrary, in a choreography, one of the participants must act as a point of control8
and notify the involved peers to coordinate the unfolding of the overall interaction.
In our example, we have the role that evaluates the condition (the Client)
inform with mutually-exclusive channel actions (dock or lookupShip) the other
role of which branch the distributed computation should proceed. Alternatively, one

8 There exist consensus protocols used to reach a distributed agreement among a network of peers,
but we can see these as ways to elect a leader that takes and communicates a decision to the rest of
the peers.

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

505

could omit how the two roles coordinate on branch selection and leave that part of
the coordination as an implementation detail to the developers. While this choice
provides more freedom to the speciﬁcation language, it leaves a heavy burden on the
shoulders of developers of the speciﬁcation, who must ﬁnd an agreement (outside
what the choreography speciﬁes) on how to implement the piece of coordination left
unspeciﬁed—e.g., they can agree on using auxiliary channels or extensions of the
speciﬁed ones to support the coordination.

Returning to our example, depending on the content of the action variable
of the Client, the distributed computation proceeds with either the dock or the
lookupShip operations on channel chan. In the ﬁrst case, we only have one
instruction, represented by the interaction Client.ship -> Harbour.ship
which indicates that the client sends the content of its ship variable to the
Harbour—the latter stores the received data in its local variable ship. In the
second case, we have the invocation of the lookupShip operation by the Client
(passing the string name). Since this is a request-response, our pseudo-language
makes it so that the channel supports the response as a dual action to the request,
marked by the lookupShip_ label. We ﬁnd, here, another branching behaviour;
this time controlled by a try-catch statement. When the findByName operation
successfully retrieves the ship value, the Harbour returns it to the Client. How-
ever, if the instruction fails, the value sent by the Harbour is a ShipNotDocked
fault. Notice that, contrarily to the previous example, the Harbour does not govern
the branching with the label (of the operation) sent to the Client; the interaction
happens on the same operation (the response to the lookupShip operation) but
on different data types—while this difference might seem only at a conceptual level,
this can have concrete repercussions on the code of the services that implement a
choreography, e.g., as shown in the paragraph on choreography-as-programs.

Closing on choreographies-as-speciﬁcations, remind that, while quite concrete,
under this interpretation, the choreography shown above is intended as a description
of the expected behaviour of the distributed program. The programmers can refer to
that speciﬁcation to manually develop the services that implement the Client and the
Harbour.

As an additional reference to help illustrate the use of WS-CDL as a speciﬁcation
language, we mention the Business Process Modelling Notation (BPMN) Choreogra-
phy Diagrams, which is a graphical language introduced to model business processes
that supports the representation of the interactions among the elements of a model as
a choreography. We report in Fig. 15.2 a possible BPMN choreography diagram of
the Harbour choreography we illustrated above. In the picture, the circles on respec-
tively the left and right sides represent the beginning and ends of the interactions.
The diamond is a choice and the boxes represent message exchange, where at the
top we ﬁnd the sender, in the middle the purpose of the message, and at the bottom
the receiver.

Choreographies as Types

The interpretation of choreographies as types still considers choreographies as a kind
of speciﬁcation of what and when interactions happen (and what is the shape of the

506

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

dock

dock or
lookup?

Client

dock ship 

Harbour

Client

Harbour

request lookup

ship lookup

lookup

Harbour

Client

Fig. 15.2 A BPMN representation of the Harbour choreography

data that travels therein) in a given distributed program. However, like other typing
disciplines, one can use choreographies-as-types to formally verify the compliance
of the programs that implement the roles of a given choreography.

The main example of this interpretation is that of global session types; a kind of

types used to deﬁne and constrain the observable behaviour of processes.

As an example, the following is a possible global session type of the choreography

of the previous paragraph.

C l i e n t -> H a r b o u r : {

dock ( ship ) ,

l o o k u p S h i p ( s t r i n g );
H a r b o u r - > C l i e n t : l o o k u p S h i p _ ( ship | S h i p N o t D o c k e d )

}

In the code above, the block : { ... } indicates a choice among the comma-
separated branches found within the block. For instance, the ﬁrst interaction, from the
Client to the Harbour, indicates that the Client can choose to either invoke the
Habour on the dock or the lookupShip operations. In the ﬁrst case, dock, the
interaction stops immediately; in the second, lookupShip, the interaction contin-
ues with the Harbour that either communicates the successful retrieval of the ship
or a ShipNotDocked fault over the same (response) operation, lookupShip_
(where we drop the brackets after the : since there is only one branch).

Given the global session type above, we can use a synthesis procedure that gener-
ates a local session type for each role. This procedure is usually called a projection,
since we are projecting the choreographic information that only concerns a speciﬁc
role, and we can use the resulting local session types to check the correct implemen-
tation of a given role.

Among the checks choreographies-as-types can perform, there is the detection of
incorrect implementations that can introduce communication deadlocks. This is one
of the major features of using choreographies—either as types or as programs, as we
see also in the next paragraph.

15.2 Elements of Service-Oriented Programming

507

The principle is that, in choreographies, one cannot write a deadlocked commu-
nication because send and receive actions are always paired in the atomic interaction
“A -> B”. This implies that we cannot, e.g., write a choreography where A indeﬁnitely
waits for a send action from B and vice versa. Since choreographies cannot introduce
communication deadlocks, when we use semantic-preserving projection procedures
(i.e., here, such that the checks deﬁned in the global session type carry to the gener-
ated local session types), we can use the projected local session types to check the
correctness (e.g., communication deadlock-freedom) of the implementations of the
roles in the choreography.

Completing our example, the respective synthesised local session types of the
Client and the Harbour could look like the following (shown side-by-side to
ease their comparison).

/* C l i e n t l o c a l s e s s i o n type */
! {

/* H a r b o u r l o c a l s e s s i o n type */
? {

dock ( ship ) ,

dock ( ship ) ,

l o o k u p S h i p ( s t r i n g );
? l o o k u p S h i p _ ( ship | S h i p N o t D o c k e d )

l o o k u p S h i p ( s t r i n g );
! l o o k u p S h i p _ ( ship | S h i p N o t D o c k e d )

}

}

As expected, the generated local session types do not carry atomic, global-level
interactions like global session types, but they rather show send and receive actions.
Speciﬁcally, the ! { ... } and ? { ... } blocks respectively indicate the
transmission and the reception of a message on one of the operations at the top of the
comma-separated branches within the block (we omit the brackets when only one
operation is available). Looking at the resulting local session types, we notice how
they are one the dual of the other—as the reader might have realised, this kind of
duality characterises only binary (i.e., participated by two parties) choreographies,
like the one in our example.

Once we obtained the respective types of the Harbour and the Client, we can
check that a given implementation of the two roles correctly follows the observable
behaviour expected by the (global) type—we invite the reader to compare the Har-
bour local type with the Harbour Jolie implementation in Sect. 15.2.5, respectively
mapping successful and faulty responses to the ship and ShipNotDocked types.

Choreographies as Programs

The interpretation of choreographies as programs postulates that choreographies
carry the code that each role shall execute, and a projection procedure generates
programs that implement the roles in the choreography.

This approach, also called choreographic programming, mainly consists in pairing
a fairly concrete choreographic language9 with a compiler able to validate chore-

9 As a reference, closer to the one we used in the choreographies-as-speciﬁcations example rather
than the more abstract one of choreographies-as-types.

508

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

ographies10 and project the valid ones into locally-executable programs. Each of
these programs implements the semantics of one of the roles in the choreography
and thus, when run in parallel, they enact the semantics of their source choreographic
program.

Summarising, while choreographies-as-speciﬁcations see choreographies as ref-
erences for implementations, both choreographies-as-types and choreographies-as-
programs concern automatic procedures to help implement correct distributed pro-
grams. Choreographies-as-types are artefacts that one uses to check the correctness
of a given implementation of a role in a choreography. In choreographic program-
ming, a choreography is a “global” program that one can compile into a set of local
ones (one for each role in the choreography), which, run together, faithfully execute
the semantics of their source choreography.

Considering the relatively concrete language we used in the choreographies-as-
speciﬁcations example (e.g., with variables and explicit conditional constructs), we
re-use it here by interpreting it as a programming language.11 Since we already com-
mented on the salient traits of the choreographic language in the previous paragraphs,
here, we concentrate on the other relevant piece of the choreography-as-programs
interpretation: the projection to local programs. To illustrate it, we show, side-by-
side, the compilation of the example choreography into two possible Jolie services
implementing the Client and the Harbour (as the reader might expect, the generated
Harbour service is close to the one we described in Sect. 15.2.5).

To proceed with the example, we assume that the channels in the choreography
have a bit more information, related to the concrete data formats, protocols, and
bindings necessary to establish an actual connection between the generated services,
so that we can project the related information into Jolie ports.12

/* C l i e n t s e r v i c e */
type ship { /* ... */ }
i n t e r f a c e c h a n I n t e r f a c e {

o n e W a y : dock ( ship )
r e q u e s t R e s p o n s e : /* ... */

}
o u t p u t P o r t c h a n H a r b o u r {

/* ... */
i n t e r f a c e s : c h a n I n t e r f a c e

}
main {

/* ... */
if ( a c t i o n == " d o c k " ){

d o c k @ c h a n H a r b o u r ( ship )

} else {

l o o k u p S h i p @ c h a n H a r b o u r ( name )( ship )

}

}

}

/* H a r b o u r s e r v i c e */
/* type ship , c h a n I n t e r f a c e */
o u t p u t P o r t L o c a l H a r b o u r { /* ... */ }
i n p u t P o r t c h a n C l i e n t {

/* ... */
i n t e r f a c e s : c h a n I n t e r f a c e

}
main {
/* ... */
[ dock ( ship ) ]
[ l o o k u p S h i p ( name )( ship ){
i n s t a l l ( S h i p N o t D o c k e d = > {

t h r o w S h i p N o t D o c k e d

} )
f i n d B y N a m e @ L o c a l H a r b o u r ( name )( ship )
} ]

10 For example, the compiler shall report ambiguous situations where the user needs to specify how
to solve knowledge-of-choice situations.
11 As a matter of fact, projects like CHOREOS and CHOReVOLUTION interpret BPMN as a
programming language to synthesise local programs that control service interactions.
12 Alternatively, one can leave to the programmers who obtain the compiled programs the task to
ﬁll in the information needed to establish the connection. This detail constitutes a trade-off between
interoperability (letting the programmers deﬁne the actual bindings of the services) and coupling
(ﬁxing in the choreography the connections among the participants).

15.3 Service-Oriented Architectures

509

Above, we see the projection of the Client on the left and that of the Harbour
on the right. Both have the necessary type and interfacse deﬁnitions (ref-
erenced in the top comment of the Harbour to ease the line-by-line comparison
between the two services). The channel from the original choreography is split in
inputPorts and outputPorts owned by the respective services. Speciﬁcally,
here, we use a rather advanced analyser that can infer that all interactions of chan-
nel chan in the choreography go from the Client to the Harbour and synthesise
only one outputPort (chanHarbour) for the former and the one inputPort
(chanClient) for the latter (remember that the only interactions from the Har-
bour to the Client are responses, marked with an underline in the choreography). The
Harbour service has an additional port, LocalHarbour, which the programmer
shall bind to a sub-service that implements the findByName operation (e.g., in
Sect. 15.2.5, we called this service Ships).

In the behaviours of the services, we ﬁnd (in a way similar to the projection of
the types seen in the previous paragraph) the send and receive actions related to the
single services. For instance, since it is the Client that evaluates the condition
(on its local variable action), we ﬁnd the conditional if ( action ... )
present in the behaviour of the Client and not in that of the Harbour. Dually, since
it is the Client that takes the decision on which branch to go, the Harbour presents
a guarded choice, which allows the service to consume any of the possible choices
made by the Client. This kind of split between who controls the condition and who
must be informed of its evaluation continues with the try-catch construct thereafter.
In this case, it is the Harbour that performs an action that can generate that observable
and, thus, we ﬁnd the Jolie-corresponding install statement only in the Harbour,
where it is used to generate the ShipNotDocked fault expected in case of a faulty
execution of the lookupShip operation.

Notwithstanding its service-oriented origins, recent works on choreographies-as-
programs conﬁrmed that the paradigm is not strictly related to service orientation, but
one can successfully marry it with other programming paradigms, such as object ori-
entation. The Choral language is a concrete example of this possibility. There, chore-
ographies are objects—the language adopts a syntax that is essentially an extension
of that of Java—which can belong to different roles. An interesting result of combin-
ing object orientation and choreographic programming is that interactions, which are
normally primitives of the language (the “A -> B” instructions seen until now), are
regular objects owned by two roles that can exchange data using their methods. As
with any choreographic programming language, also Choral comes with a compiler
which, for example, can compile a Choral program into a set of Java programs that
implement the distributed logic of their source choreography.

15.3 Service-Oriented Architectures

In this chapter, we mainly focussed on the linguistic side of service-oriented pro-
gramming, but we would not provide a complete picture to the reader if we did not
mention the other important half of the service-oriented cosmos, which is that of
architectures.

510

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

Of course, giving a comprehensive treatment of service-oriented architectures
would require a book on its own (as there are many published just on this matter).
In the following, we report a brief comment on the early and recent traits of service-
oriented architectures. To do this, we continue to keep the focus that guided our
exploration of service-oriented programming and describe how the principles of
loose coupling and interoperability impacted and guided the development of the
architectural side of the paradigm.

15.3.1 The First Generation: Web Services

Returning to the historical steps from the introduction of this chapter, we mentioned
how the advent of the Internet gave a new impulse to distributed programming, gen-
erating advanced forms of cooperation between the exponentially-growing number
of machines that started accessing the Web.

Since the early 2000s, the service-oriented paradigm gained more and more
momentum, allowing developers to create new services either by introducing inde-
pendent modules in the system or by programming ones that (dynamically) compose
the existing services. For instance, one could combine the online services of an air-
line company, a hotel chain, and a car rental company to create a service that plans
a trip. This way of composing services in hierarchies of more and more complex
structures took the name of Service-Oriented Architectures (SOAs).

From a technological perspective, the at-the-time standard way to build service-
oriented programs relied on the realisation of applications that used the so-called
Web Services (WS) standards: XML, SOAP, WSDL, and UDDI—the latter is a
standard for deﬁning service discovery, i.e., which service from an available pool
a client should contact, given the type of data requested by the latter. Besides this
technology stack, the other distinctive element of ﬁrst-generation SOAs was the
use of an Enterprise Service Bus (ESB, cf. Sect. 15.2.3), which served both as the
middleware for routing requests after discovery and mediating protocol integration.
While ﬁrst-generation SOAs pioneered the paradigm and helped tackle the cou-
pling and interoperability issues of remote procedure calls and stubs (cf. Sect. 14.5.4),
they posed one main problem, which prevented their wide adoption—although WS
SOAs are still a standard in some middle and large enterprise IT infrastructures.
This problem regards the high complexity of setting up, managing, developing,
and evolving WS SOAs, both from the point of view of (knowing and deploying)
the technology stack and of the design, evolution, and code reuse of the services
themselves.

On the one hand, approaching WS SOA development appears as a daunting
task from the get-go. Indeed, as mentioned earlier, one can start developing WS
SOAs with the combination of WSDL and SOAP (and a programming language of
choice). However, the full technology stack of web services results in a complex set
of standards—the cited WSDL, SOAP, etc., but also many more, of which we report
a non-exhaustive schematisation in Fig. 15.3 (and leave the task of looking up their
deﬁnition and purposes to the daring reader)—which can easily scare away both

15.3 Service-Oriented Architectures

511

Business 
processes

Quality  
of Service

Description and
Discovery

Messaging

WSFL, BPEL4WS, WS-CDL, WS-CAF

WS-SecureConversation,
WS-SecurityPolicy, WS-
Trust

WS-Coordination, 
WS-Transaction, WS-
AtomicTransaction, WS-
BusinessActivity

UDDI, WSIL, WS-Discovery

WSDM, WS-Manageability,
SPML, WS-Provisioning

WSDL, WSCL, WSCI, WS-MetadataExchange, WS-Policy

SOAP, WS-Addressing, WS-Notiﬁcation, WS-Eventing, WS-Enumeration, WS-
MessageDelivery, WS-Reliability, WS-ReliableMessaging, WS-Resource, WS-Transfer

XML, HTTP, SMTP, FTP, etc.

Fig. 15.3 Schematisation of a (non-exhaustive) list of WS standards

programmers who are approaching the paradigm and companies that would need to
commit money and time on technology and know-how to run their IT systems. This
complexity factor is further exacerbated by the ubiquitous presence of ESB tech-
nologies. Indeed, while ESBs make it easy to connect and let services interact, the
fact that they can host some logic for mediating the communication among services
leads programmers to put service-speciﬁc code there rather than further complicating
the existing services. Paradoxically, in this way, ESBs make SOAs more complex
(since now the actual behaviour of a service is fragmented in parts of the ESB), and
they increase the coupling and limit the interoperability of services, since the ESB
becomes an essential component for the correct execution the SOA.

On the other hand, the high complexity of setting up and publishing a service
makes it easier to build “big” services—dubbed monoliths in recent years—that
implement disparate functionalities, rather than follow the established principle of
separation of concerns and develop a service for each set of cohesive operations.13
The hindering aspect of this tendency towards monoliths regards the (again) difﬁculty
in managing, evolving, and reusing services. Indeed, larger and sparser codebases
require the developer to keep in mind and reason on an equally large and intricate
network of interacting components. Moreover, it is more difﬁcult to extract and reuse
subsets of the (implementations of) operations, because these tend to share compo-
nents therein (e.g., imagine different operations that reuse the same data structures
and modules). These pitfalls—and the lack of guiding principles to avoid them—
further dissuaded developers from developing their distributed programs as SOAs.

13 As an example, we can classify a service as a monolith if it implements the operation for, e.g.,
doing groceries, accounting, and warehouse management. While these are somewhat related (e.g.,
they all keep track of resources), their application domains (and data types, behaviours, etc.) are
different and belong in separate modules.

512

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

Lightweight Standards and Cohesive Interfaces

The problems listed above pushed for a new set of architectural principles that intro-
duced the second generation of service-oriented architectures.

The ﬁrst principle is that of using lightweight standards for developing services.
This is a direct response to the frightening scenario depicted in Fig. 15.3, and, more
practically, to the still-high complexity of the “baseline” technologies, like WSDL
and SOAP, whose irksomeness was further exasperated by the severe verbosity and
undecipherability of the XML format. The most renowned example of this shift to
lightweight standards is the mentioned REST style (see Sect. 15.2.4).

The second principle regards the design of service interfaces, it is called cohesion,
and it has been introduced to contrast the uncontrolled growth of contextually-sparse
services and to ease code reuse. To understand cohesion, let us consider an example of
a service that provides two operations, internally implemented by two submodules:
the login operation, which lets users access the other operations of the service,
and the compute operation, which performs some heavy-weight computations upon
request by logged users. In particular, since the operations belong in the same service,
their sub-modules share some internal data to keep the state of logged users—e.g.,
login creates a token that it both sends to the authenticated user and saves in a
shared data structure that compute can access, to validate user requests that carry
said token. The fact that the service provides this diverse set of functionalities makes
it uncohesive, where cohesion indicates that a service (or, in general, a software unit)
implements only functionalities strongly related to the concern that it is meant to deal
with. We can contrast this uncohesive, monolithic service with an architecture made
of two services, one offering the login operation and the other the compute one.
Having cohesive services helps to achieve (efﬁcient) code reuse. Indeed, if we wanted
to build our distributed program with a new set of functionalities, we could do it by
adding dedicated units and reuse what the program already offers, e.g., we would not
need the new services to handle user authentication, since they can delegate these
tasks to the existing “login” unit (the one implementing the login operation). On
the contrary, in the monolith, the login and compute operations are integrated via
internal memory and, unless we employ some (fragile) workaround to, e.g., intercept
the token and share it with the new units, we cannot reuse the login functionality
for other services. Similarly, our architecture becomes more modular, so that, if we
did not need to have logged users (e.g., because we are in a trusted network), we could
just run the “compute” service. We can apply the same principle when building new
service architectures: if we have to handle user authentication, we do not necessarily
need to start from scratch and rather use a copy of the service we previously built.
Notably, having cohesive services spares us from integrating functionalities that are
inessential to our program. For instance, imagine using the monolith in the example
to just obtain the functionalities provided by the login operation. In doing so, we
compromise the performance and quality of our distributed program. For example,
we waste resources (CPU, memory) to provide the unnecessary compute operation
and malicious users could exploit it to overload the service by ﬂooding the service
with compute invocations (performing a denial-of-service attack).

15.3 Service-Oriented Architectures

513

In a sense, we can see cohesiveness as an interpretation of the principle of loose
coupling, applied at the functionality level. We want functionalities to be as loosely-
coupled as possible, so we follow the convention of cohesive interfaces to help
us achieve a good balance between spreading the functionalities among the fewest
possible services and, at the same time, having units which we can easily add, remove,
modify, and reuse.

15.3.2 Second Generation: Microservices and Serverless

The most recent incarnation of SOAs is that of microservice architectures, where
the “micro” preﬁx underlines the tension towards minimising the set of functional-
ities a service provides to that cohesive set we illustrated in the previous section.
As a consequence, microservices tend to abandon (or, more accurately, cherry-pick
some useful elements of) the WS technology stack of the ﬁrst SOA generation to
further technology agnosticism. The motto for microservices is that, since the only
formal dependency/obligation a microservice has is its interface and how it commu-
nicates (usually adopting open standards, e.g., HTTP), the programmer can choose
the technologies that best ﬁt their speciﬁc application scenario. This impulse towards
minimality and independence met the necessity of large teams of developers, who
collaborate on the implementation of the same distributed program. Here, microser-
vices proved to be a ﬁtting architectural style. The teams would divide into subgroups,
each responsible for the development, evolution, and execution of a speciﬁc microser-
vice that makes up the distributed program. The shift to microservices, which started
in the 2010s, marked the widespread return of SOAs, with companies like Netﬂix,
Amazon, Facebook, and Twitter as industry spearheaders of the revived architectural
style, which is the state of the art of today’s distributed system architectures.

From the language point of view, we can see some concepts from service-oriented
programming analysed in the previous parts of this chapter catering for the needs of
microservice programming.

For instance, in microservices, we need to reconcile the need for specifying the
contracts of the services (concretely, their types and interfaces) and the tension
towards technology agnosticism, which dictates the usage of abstract speciﬁcations
that one can then tie to a speciﬁc, concrete technology—of course, these are the
principles of loose coupling and interoperability that guided our exploration of the
paradigm since the beginning of the chapter. As observed in Sects. 15.2.2 and 15.2.4,
languages can help on this matter by providing data-format-abstract types and inter-
face languages that support the deﬁnition of abstract, explicit messaging patterns.
These abstractions allow the user to deﬁne their services without committing to a
concrete technology stack, and they leave the grounding to conﬁgurations that the
user pairs with the target service, depending on the speciﬁcs of the given deployment
scenario.

Another aspect is that of service composition. As discussed earlier, in SOAs
(microservice architectures in particular), services may cooperate to provide more
complex and elaborate functionalities. Here, the principle of modularisation of

514

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

microservices competes with the complexity of managing a cosmos of software units
to achieve a given goal. Using languages based on other paradigms than services (e.g.,
functions or objects) can work against the user. Indeed, as we illustrated with our Java
orchestrators in Sect. 15.2.5, adaptations (e.g., via annotated mappings) quickly fall
short when we raise the complexity of coordination. On the contrary, service-oriented
languages can offer great support to developers in deﬁning advanced behaviours. To
build advanced cooperation logic, we mentioned the existence of service-oriented
languages based on the complementary approaches of orchestration and choreogra-
phy (cf. Sect. 15.2.1).

To complete the picture of second-generation SOAs, we need to take a quick
detour on the state of the art in distributed system deployment, based on “cloud com-
puting”. The introduction of service orientation occurred at around the same time as
the rise of cloud computing and its “as-a-service” business model.14 In this model,
cloud providers offer storage (disk space, databases), networking (network topolo-
gies, communication services), and computation as commodities, which developers
can access ﬂexibility and on-demand. In practice, instead of requiring developers to
buy hardware and manage execution platforms and software, they can easily assem-
ble (as well as release) these components through the services offered by some cloud
providers. The business, from the side of cloud providers, regards resource sharing:
when a customer requires some computation resources or some storage, the provider
would not buy some new machine, set it up, and give exclusive access to the cus-
tomer. On the contrary, cloud computing technologies allow the provider to share the
multitude of physical computers (the “cloud”) it owns and manages, by partitioning
and assembling their computational, storage, and networking resources into virtual
machines dedicated to its customers.

A recent addition to the family of cloud computing services is the execution model
called “serverless” and, in particular, that of “Functions-as-a-Service” (in the follow-
ing, we use the two terms interchangeably). In serverless, the developer writes some
functions—looking at service orientation, imagine a function as a service providing
only a single operation—and asks the cloud provider to execute them in response to
some trigger (e.g., in response to some request). The developer does not manage any
aspect of the infrastructure or platform that runs its function (i.e., they do not manage
the server where its function runs, hence the misnomer “serverless”, although servers
are, of course, involved). Every time the trigger activates, the provider puts a new
instance of the function in execution. In essence, serverless computing dispenses the
developer from assembling the infrastructure that runs its architecture of functions.
The focus on functions loosens the concept of cohesiveness seen in microservices:
since functions are single behavioural units that run independently, they are not
bound within some software module (e.g., a microservice) that compels developers
in designing and developing connected functionalities in cohesive interfaces.

14 As a proof of the contemporaneity of and interplay between ﬁrst-generation SOAs and cloud
computing, one of the earliest cloud providers, Amazon, named their subsidiary “Amazon Web
Services”.

15.5 Bibliographical Note

515

We can see the two styles of microservices and serverless as dual. In particular,
serverless functions give more freedom to developers—in a way, bringing to an
extreme the principles of loose coupling and interoperability—but they also present
new challenges for developers due to the high fragmentation of their composition
model, which demands more reasoning and discipline than microservices. Also in
this case, (service-oriented) languages can help in harnessing this complexity and
support programmers in deﬁning and building correct implementations.

15.4 Summary

In this chapter, we have covered the main aspects of service-oriented programming
and brieﬂy looked at the complementary concepts related to service-oriented archi-
tectures. Of course, both treatments (the second, in particular) are far from being
an exhaustive representation of the matter. Our aim, here, has been to provide the
essential linguistic concepts that mark the service-oriented paradigm, and we invite
interested readers in deepening their knowledge by consulting books dedicated to
either topic.

In this chapter, we focussed on aspects of service-oriented programming:

(cid:129) the distinctive traits of distributed programs, the need for open systems, and the
introduction of the principles of loose coupling and interoperability, which char-
acterises the origin and evolution of the service-oriented programming paradigm;
(cid:129) services, explained following a concept-based structure that breaks them down
into their fundamental elements: data types, interfaces, and behaviours. For each
element, we looked at language constructs introduced to address the problems of
composing a program made of distributed units and, in particular, we scrutinised
these concerning their support for loose coupling and interoperability;

(cid:129) service-oriented architectures, which are an important driving force that inﬂu-
enced the evolution of service-oriented programming. The study of their trends
and phases helps us understand the motivations behind the introduction, adoption,
and obsolescence of some language constructs that characterise service-oriented
programming.

15.5 Bibliographical Note

The literature on service-oriented programming is vast and covers a wide range of
topics, from theoretical concepts to practical guides. As an offshoot of concurrent/dis-
tributed programming, also service orientation has many theoretical contributions,
e.g., coming from the tradition of process algebras and focussed on the formalisation
of services (data types, interfaces, and behaviours), and the veriﬁcation of their prop-

516

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

erties. In addition to the fundamental texts, on concurrency, mentioned in Sect. 14.9,
literature on service-oriented programming includes models for service orchestra-
tion [1,2] and choreographies [3–7]. Literature on the Jolie programming language
includes its foundational theory [8], its conceptual and programming models [9] and
many applications, see [10].

Besides languages, service orientation also has a broad literature on architectures,
with instructional books on modelling and designing ﬁrst- and second-generation
SOAs [11–14].

15.6 Exercises

1. You want to build an articles service, part of a blog distributed architecture.
You start from the data structures it must handle. Make some examples, using
the XML and JSON formats, of article values that hold the following informa-
tion: article identiﬁer (e.g., an integer), title of the article, list of authors, date of
publication, text of the article. Deﬁne a JSON schema that validates any viable
instantiation of the article values that you exempliﬁed. Deﬁne a Jolie type for
the same purpose. Spot the relevant differences and similarities between the two
ways of specifying data types for services (in particular, considering the open and
close stance the two have on subtyping).

2. You want to build a second service, comments, to also handle article comments.
Walking the same steps you followed at point 1, exemplify and validate comment
values, which shall hold: a comment identiﬁer (e.g., an integer, can also be used
to temporally order the comments), identiﬁer of its related article, author of the
comment, date of the comment, content of the comment.

3. Describe the interfaces of the services that offer the operations to submit and read
articles and comments. Namely, the articles interface provides two opera-
tions: submit a new article and retrieve the last X articles (where X is a number),
while the comments interface offers the two operations: submit a new comment
and retrieve the last X comments (where X is a number), both related to some
article Y (where Y is an article identiﬁer). Formalise the two interfaces using
WSDL, Jolie interfaces, and the REST format (possibly re-using the structures
and validation formats at the previous items).

4. Write an articles Java orchestrator that implements the articles interface

at point 3 as a REST service (e.g., using Java Spring).

5. Write a comments Jolie orchestrator that implements the comments interface

at point 3 as a REST service.

6. Write a client service that interacts with the articles and the comments
services to implement an operation that allows users to retrieve the last X (number)
articles and their Y (number) related comments. Use the technology you prefer
for the implementation of the client.

7. Write a gateway orchestrator that implements both the articles and the
comments interfaces by forwarding the requests to and the responses back from

References

517

the two namesake services at points 4 and 5. Try to implement two versions of
the gateway: one in Jolie and one in Java (Spring). Notice the different ways in
which orchestration works under the two alternatives.

8. Modify the client at point 6 to interact with the gateway at point 7. Notice
the modiﬁcations you need to perform on the client to make it interact with the
gateway in place of the articles and comments services. Did you need to
substantially change the logic of the application or did the changes remain con-
ﬁned to only a set of parameters? What would happen if you needed to change, e.g.,
the format of the data from, e.g., JSON to XML, or to switch from REST/HTTP
to another protocol, e.g., SOAP? Ponder how the different technologies seen in
this chapter help in minimising those modiﬁcations.

9. Deﬁne a choreographic speciﬁcation (e.g., using the pseudo-language presented in
Sect. 15.2.5) that implements the operation of the client orchestrator at point 6.
The choreography has four participants, a user, a client, an articles, and
a comments services. The latter three implement the interfaces of their namesake
services at the previous points. Consider using the choreography you deﬁned as-
type (with the appropriate type abstractions) and as-program and observe whether
and how the services that you implemented align with the different choreographic
artefacts.

References

1. A. Lapadula, R. Pugliese, F. Tiezzi, A calculus for orchestration of web services, in European

Symposium on Programming (Springer, 2007), pp. 33–47

2. H.T. Vieira, L. Caires, J.C. Seco, The conversation calculus: a model of service-oriented com-

putation, in European Symposium on Programming (Springer, 2008), pp. 269–283

3. R. Hamadi, B. Benatallah, A Petri net-based model for web service composition, in Proceedings

of the 14th Australasian database conference, vol. 17, pp. 191–200 (2003)

4. M. Autili, P. Inverardi, M. Tivoli, Automated synthesis of service choreographies. IEEE Softw.

32(1), 50–57 (2014)

5. D. Ancona, V. Bono, M. Bravetti, J. Campos, G. Castagna, P. Deniélou, S.J. Gay, N. Ges-
bert, E. Giachino, R. Hu, et al., Behavioral types in programming languages. Found. Trends®
Program. Lang. 3(2–3), 95–230 (2016)

6. M. Dalla Preda, M. Gabbrielli, S. Giallorenzo, I. Lanese, J. Mauro, Dynamic choreographies:

theory and implementation. Log. Methods Comput. Sci. 13(2) (2017)

7. F. Montesi, Introduction to Choreographies (Cambridge University Press, 2023)
8. C. Guidi, R. Lucchi, R. Gorrieri, N. Busi, G. Zavattaro, Sock: a calculus for service oriented
computing, in International Conference on Service-Oriented Computing (Springer, 2006), pp.
327–338

9. F. Montesi, C. Guidi, G. Zavattaro, Service-oriented programming with Jolie, in Web Services

Foundations (Springer, 2014), pp. 81–107

10. The Jolie team. Jolie home page (2014). https://www.jolie-lang.org/. Accessed 05 Jan. 2023
11. G. Hohpe, B. Woolf, Enterprise Integration Patterns: Designing, Building, and Deploying

Messaging Solutions (Addison-Wesley Professional, 2004)

12. T. Erl. Service-Oriented Architecture: Concepts, Technology, and Design (Pearson Education,

2005)

518

15 Service-Oriented Programming Paradigm

13. S. Newman. Building Microservices: Designing Fine-Grained Systems (O’Reilly Media, 2015)
14. O. Zimmermann, M. Stocker, D. Lübke, U. Zdun, C. Pautasso. Patterns for API Design-
Simplifying Integration with Loosely Coupled Message Exchanges (Addison-Wesley Profes-
sional, 2022)
