# Fuente
- archivo: 533-574.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/(Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science) Maurizio Gabbrielli_ Simone Martini - Programming Languages_ Principles and Paradigms (2nd Edition)-Springer (2023)/533-574.pdf
- extraido: 2026-03-26T16:14:29

# Contenido

Short Historical Perspective

16

The ﬁrst electronic, programmable computers, and, therefore, the ﬁrst programming
languages, appeared at the end of the 1940s. Since then, many hundreds (if not
thousands) of languages have been deﬁned. In the previous chapters of this book, we
have sought to identify the most important design and implementation characteristics
that are common to large classes of contemporary languages.

In this ﬁnal chapter, we seek to understand what were the reasons that led, in the
last seventy years, to the afﬁrmation of these characteristics and hence to the success
of some languages and the disappearance of many others.

16.1 Beginnings

The ﬁrst programmable electronic computers appeared in the second half of the
1940s. In recent times when considered from the perspective of the history of science.
Aeons when compared to the rate of development of information technology. To
realize the distance that separates us from the early history of computing, one should
think that the ﬁrst computers were elephantine machines (lengths greater than 10
metres, weights greater than 4 tons), so expensive that they could only be afforded
by government institutes or by large agencies, and they had less processing power
than that of the programmable pocket calculators that would appear in the next few
decades.

There is debate about what must be considered the ﬁrst computer. Of course,
this primacy depends on what we intend with the term “computer”. The general
agreement, in computer science circles, is that a computer in the modern sense must
have the following properties: (i) it is electronic and digital; (ii) it is able to perform
the four elementary arithmetic operations (iii) it is programmable; (iv) it allows the

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
M. Gabbrielli and S. Martini, Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms,
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34144-1_16

519

520

16 Short Historical Perspective

storage of programs and data. Under this deﬁnition, probably the ﬁrst operational
computer, with adequate memory, was the EDSAC, designed and developed at the
University of Cambridge by Maurice Wilkes’ group. It went live in 1949, and it was
inﬂuenced by fundamental work by J. Mauchly and J.P. Eckert of the Moore School
at the University of Pennsylvania, who used some of J. von Neumann’s ideas. Their
EDVAC computer was described in the design papers with all the four properties we
enumerated above. However, it was not constructed until 1951.

Instead, if we admit a more general deﬁnition, then we can also consider as the
pretenders to the title of ﬁrst computer ASCC/MARK I and ENIAC (1946) which,
in any case, remain fundamental precursors. These machines were able to execute
sequences of arithmetic operations in a controlled fashion via an actual program.
The program, however, could not be stored inside the machine and was expressed
using elementary formalisms, sometimes also using physical switches.

ASCC/MARK I (IBM Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator or Harvard
Mark I) was constructed in 1944 by IBM with the cooperation of Harvard University
with H. Aiken as principal investigator. This machine, used by the U.S. Navy for
military tasks, was rudimentary to our modern eyes. Indeed, it could only carry
out the work of a few tens of people and required the use of punched tapes and
other external physical media to record the instructions and to transmit data to the
computation devices. Think, for example, that a (decimal) constant of 23 ﬁgures
was speciﬁed manually using 23 switches, each of which could occupy 10 positions
corresponding to the 10 decimal ﬁgures!

ENIAC, on the other hand, was constructed in 1946 by J. Mauchly and
J.P. Eckert at the Moore School of the University of Pennsylvania and initially J. von
Neumann also worked on the design. ENIAC also did not have program storage
and was programmed using physical devices, for example, using electrical cables
to connect the different physical parts of the computer, according to input param-
eters. Furthermore, many consider this machine as the ﬁrst real computer because,
unlike ASCC/MARK I, ENIAC was many orders of magnitude faster than humans
at computing and was immediately recognised as a tool for fundamental progress.
Already in 1947, L.P. Tabor of the Moore School foresaw that the speed of ENIAC
and computers would allow “the solution of mathematical problems until now never
considered because of the enormous amount of computation required.” ENIAC was
used effectively for the complicated calculation of ballistic trajectories.

The limitations of these ﬁrst machines were clearly due to their novelty. All the
technology needed for their hardware had to be invented, and Computer Science
didn’t exist yet. The importance of the programming task and the development of
linguistic tools to support it were not yet recognised. In the ﬁrst applications (often
military), the programming activity was seen as an accessory phase, so to speak, of
the calculation process. Even in more general applications, such as those of EDSAC
and the machines of that generation, things did not improve much: low-level machine
languages were used for programming, which basically provided a description, in
binary code, of the operations and calculation mechanisms of the machine itself.
These machine languages were composed of elementary instructions (for example,
instructions for adding, loading a value into a register, and so on) that could be

16.1 Beginnings

521

immediately executed by the processor. The process of coding was completely man-
ual, there was not even the concept of a symbolic assembly code. Machine languages
are also called ﬁrst-generation languages (or 1GL).

Without reaching the edge cases of “physical” coding constants in MARK I, it
is clear that the use of such languages made the writing of programs difﬁcult. The
correction of such programs, once they had reached a certain size, was impossible.
At this stage, programming is mainly a technological matter, closely coupled to the
details of the speciﬁc machine being programmed. It was soon realised that, to exploit
the full power of the computer, it was necessary to develop adequate formalisms that
were more distant from machines and closer to the user’s natural language.

A ﬁrst step in this direction was the introduction of assembly languages. We can
see these languages as symbolic representations of the machine language—there is
a one-to-one correspondence between machine language instructions and assembly
language codes. Programs written in assembly language are translated into programs
written in machine language by a program called an assembler. Every model of a
computer has its own assembly language, so the portability of these programs is
nearly impossible. Assembly languages are also called second-generation languages
(or 2GL).

The true jump in quality was achieved in the 1950s, with the introduction of
high-level languages, also called third-generation languages (or 3GL). These were
designed as abstract languages which would ignore the physical characteristics of the
computer and were instead suited to express algorithms in a way that was relatively
easy to parse by human users. Among the ﬁrst attempts in this sense were some
formalisms that permitted the use of symbolic notation for arithmetic expressions.
The expressions thus encoded could then be translated automatically into instructions
executable by the machine. It is from these attempts that FORTRAN (FORmula
TRANslation) was born in 1957.1 FORTRAN can be considered to be the ﬁrst true
high-level language.

From 1957 until today, many hundreds of programming languages have been
deﬁned and implemented. It is estimated that there have been more than a hundred
widely used ones. Apart from fashions, commercial reasons, and occasional cir-
cumstances, certain guidelines and evolutionary principles can be recognised in the
development of high-level languages. In the remaining part of this chapter, we will
therefore try to outline these principles in such a way as to provide an orientation
tool for entering the modern “Babel” of programming languages. We make no claim
to exhaustiveness, however, because a complete guide would require another book.

1 The project began within IBM in 1953, the ﬁrst manual deﬁning the language was produced in
1956, and the ﬁrst compiler was ready in the spring of 1957.

522

16 Short Historical Perspective

16.2 Factors in the Development of Languages

High-level languages have always been designed with the aim of facilitating com-
puter programming. However, from the 1950s to the present day, the importance and
cost of the various components involved in the realization of programs have changed
substantially, and thus also the priorities in language design have completely changed.
In the 1950s, hardware was certainly the most expensive and important resource—
Thomas Watson, president of IBM, asserted in 1943 that there would be no market
for more than ﬁve computers in the world! The ﬁrst high-level languages were thus
designed with the aim of obtaining efﬁcient programs that could make the most of the
hardware’s potential. This attitude of the ﬁrst languages is reﬂected in the presence
of many constructs inspired directly by the structure of the physical machine. For
example, the “three-way jump” present in Fortran was derived directly from the
corresponding instruction of the IBM 704. The fact that programming was difﬁcult
and time-consuming was considered a minor problem that could be solved with more
human resources, which were certainly cheaper than hardware.

Today, the situation is diametrically opposed: computer hardware is relatively
cheap and efﬁcient, and the preponderant costs in setting up a computer system
are linked to the employment of computer specialists. Moreover, given the increas-
ingly critical applications of computing systems (think of avionics applications or
control systems for a nuclear power plant), there are concerns of correctness and
security that ﬁfty years ago were minimal, if not absent. Thus, modern languages are
designed taking into account ﬁrst the improvement of various software project activ-
ities, including the veriﬁcation of the correctness of programs and their maintenance,
while concerns regarding the efﬁcient use of the physical machine has receded to the
background, except in some particular cases.

Obviously, we have not gone from the 1950s vision to the current one with a
seamless solution: the development of programming languages has followed a long,
continuous process governed by various factors. Here we see some of the most
important ones:

Hardware The type and performance of available hardware devices clearly inﬂu-
enced the languages that used them. We see this point better in the following
sections, where we will consider, in different historical contexts, the inﬂuence of
physical machines on the languages of their time.

Applications Applications of computers, initially of a purely numerical nature,
have rapidly expanded to many different ﬁelds, including some in which the pro-
cessing of non-numerical information is required. New ﬁelds of application may
require languages with speciﬁc characteristics. For example, in the ﬁelds of arti-
ﬁcial intelligence and knowledge management, languages are needed that allow
the manipulation of symbolic formalisms rather than the solution of mathematical
problems. Or, computer games are usually realised using particular programming
languages.

16.3 1950s and 1960s

523

New Methodologies The development of new programming methodologies, espe-
cially for programming on a large scale, has inﬂuenced the development of new
languages. A signiﬁcant example in this respect is object-oriented programming.
Implementation The implementation of the constructs of a language is signiﬁcant
for the development of subsequent languages as it allows one to realise the validity
of a construct and its practical feasibility.

Theory

Finally, we should not forget the role played by theoretical studies. They
had an important part in selecting certain types of constructs and, above all, in
identifying new technical tools to improve programming activities. Think, for
instance, of what we have seen with regard to the elimination of the goto and
the introduction of advanced type systems.

These factors, and others, are decisive in the life cycle of a programming language
that, in most cases, is quite short. The exceptions are some languages that, due to
the goodness of the initial project or, more often, for commercial and social reasons,
survive for more than a decade. We will see some of these in the following.

16.3 1950s and 1960s

As we saw at the beginning of this chapter, the ﬁrst computers, from the late 1940s to
the early 1950s, can be considered precursors: interesting from a historical point of
view, but very far removed from modern computers, both in terms of the languages
used and the applications that could be implemented on them.

Towards the end of the 1950s and in the 1960s, mainframes, the ﬁrst true general-
purpose computers that could be used for different applications, came to the fore.
They were, however, machines available only at a few major processing centres,
as they had enormous size and cost (they ﬁlled a room and cost millions of Euros,
in today’s terms) and were only usable by specialised personnel. The IBM 360 is a
famous example of a mainframe, which lasted for many years in the most important
computer centres.

The processing methods used by mainframes were called batch processing. In
this kind of system, programs were executed in a strictly sequential manner. The
entire computational resource of the computer was assigned to a program which
took a “batch” of data as input and produced, as output, another batch of data. When
a program terminated, the next program would execute. Data and programs were
initially represented on punched cards which were read by suitable equipment. The
data structures mainly used for data input and output were ﬁles. Such systems did
not engage in much interaction with users. For example, in the event of errors during
execution, the program had to be able to restore the correct state by itself, since no
external interactive intervention was possible.

The ﬁrst high-level languages were developed for this type of processing system.
They were languages that offer few opportunities for interaction with the machine

524

16 Short Historical Perspective

and which were suited to writing monolithic programs to be executed from start to
ﬁnish without external interaction.

FORTRAN

As we have already mentioned, the ﬁrst truly imperative high-level language can be
considered to be Fortran, developed by J. Backus’ group in 1957 and designed
for numerical-scientiﬁc applications. At a time when programming was solely in
assembly language and where the major concern was for program efﬁciency, high-
level language design could not ignore the performance of compiled code. Conse-
quently, the design of Fortran put performance ﬁrst, and so the characteristics of
a particular physical reference machine (the IBM 704) were taken into account in
the design. However, unlike previous languages, Fortran was already in its ﬁrst
version a high-level language in the modern sense. In fact, this ﬁrst version con-
tained many constructs that were independent of a speciﬁc machine. Fortran was
the ﬁrst programming language to allow the direct use of symbolic, complex arith-
metic expressions. After some modiﬁcations and new versions (in particular, those
in 1966, 1977, and 1990), Fortran has survived until today and is still used for
some numerical applications. However, it is an outdated language whose survival
is mainly linked to practical issues, such as the existence of an extensive library of
functions for scientiﬁc and engineering calculations. A Fortran program consists
of a main routine and a number of subroutines that can be compiled separately. It
is not possible to deﬁne nested environments (nested subprograms are allowed only
from Fortran90) and there are two only kinds of environment: the local and the
global. This, as we know, greatly simpliﬁes the handling of names and the environ-
ment. Memory, either for subprograms or for the main routine, is statically allocated
and there is no dynamic memory management (Fortran90 is again an exception
by providing dynamic memory). The sequence control commands in the ﬁrst ver-
sion referred directly to assembly language and, therefore, goto was prominently
used. In successive versions, more structured commands were introduced. Parameter
passing is by reference. Types are present in a limited way, including only numeric
(integer, real in single and double precision, complex), boolean, array, string, and
ﬁle.

ALGOL

Algol means, more than a language, a family of imperative languages, introduced
since the late 1950s. These languages, although they never achieved real commer-
cial success, were dominant in academia from the 1960s until the 1970s and had a
formidable impact on the design of all subsequent programming languages. Many
of the concepts and constructs that are found in modern languages were introduced,
or experimented with, for the ﬁrst time, in the languages of the Algol family.

The progenitor was Algol 58, designed in 1958 by a committee led by Peter
Naur. The committee was the fusion of two previous groups, one European and one
American, each tasked with the deﬁnition of a new language. The name Algol is
an acronym for ALGOrithmic Language and clearly indicates the purpose of the

16.3 1950s and 1960s

525

language. Unlike Fortran, indeed, Algol was designed as a universal language,
suited to expressing algorithms in general, rather than for use in speciﬁc types of
applications. There were various revisions to the language, all originating from the
collective work of an international committee (which had a turbulent life, particularly
towards the end). In 1960, Algol 60 was deﬁned. This is the version that is perhaps
the most important (it had a minor revision in 1962). Beginning in 1966, dissenting
from the majority of the committee, C.A.R. Hoare and N. Wirth started the basic
design of Algol W, later implemented in 1968 by Wirth and which constitutes the
progenitor of Pascal. The majority of the committee, instead, continued their own
work which led to the deﬁnition of Algol 68.

Algol 58 and, in particular, Algol 60 greatly increased the machine-indepen-
dence of the language, making the notation used for programming closer to mathe-
matical notation and avoiding almost every reference to speciﬁc architectures, even
at the cost of some additional design complications. For example, the input and
output operations, rather than being coded by suitable instructions in the language,
must be implemented by external procedures, deﬁned for the devices of a speciﬁc
installation.

Algol 60 made at least three fundamental contributions to modern languages.
The ﬁrst is parameter passing by name (see Sect. 7.1.2), a mechanism complicated
to implement (and for this reason later abandoned for more then twenty years), but
which has been of paramount importance in deﬁning mechanisms (i.e., closures) for
passing functions as parameters.

Another important innovation in Algol 60 was the introduction of blocks and,

therefore, the ability to hierarchically structure the environment.

At the syntactic level, thanks to the contribution of John Backus, Algol 60 was
the ﬁrst language to use Chomsky’s generative grammars to express the syntax of the
language (in particular, context-free grammars were used in the form that we now
know as Backus Naur Form or BNF). This novelty opened the way to a whole new
area of research that has been most important to the theory and practice of compilers.
Among the other contributions of the languages in the Algol family to modern
languages, let us further note: recursion and dynamic memory management (but for
these features see also what we say below about Lisp); type systems with the ability
to permit new user-deﬁned types; ﬁnally, many structured commands for sequence
control in the form that we use today, (if then else, for and while from
Algol 60 or case from Algol 68).

LISP

Lisp (LISt Processor) was designed in 1960 by a group led by John McCarthy at MIT
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology) and was one of the ﬁrst languages designed
for non-numeric applications. As we have already seen in the box on Sect. 6.1.1, it
is a language designed to manipulate symbolic expressions (called s-expressions) to
be typically used in Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Among Lisp applications were the ﬁrst
attempts at automatic translation.

Lisp was never standardized—developed and implemented over 30 years in dif-
ferent versions, it was never much used commercially. However, it is an important

526

16 Short Historical Perspective

language that experimented with several techniques that have been later used in
other languages. In the academic world, Lisp still enjoys a following (the Scheme
language, born as a variant of Lisp, was and still is used in several academic courses).
The ﬁrst implementations of Lisp were very inefﬁcient, so much so that architec-
tures specially designed for Lisp (so-called Lisp machines) were constructed. Later,
the use of various tricks, and in particular the improvement of garbage-collection
techniques, allowed efﬁcient implementations even on traditional architectures.

Lisp is a functional language that, as has been said, manipulates special data struc-
tures. Every program consists of a sequence of expressions to be evaluated. Some of
these expressions can be function deﬁnitions that are to be used in other expressions.
Typically, the language is implemented using an interpreter and programs are eval-
uated in an interactive environment. Among the contributions of Lisp, we can note:
the introduction of higher-order programming, i.e., the possibility of constructing
functions that accept as parameters and/or produce as the result of the evaluation
of other functions; the dynamic management of memory using a heap; automatic
garbage collection. Other speciﬁc properties of Lisp have remained conﬁned to this
language, such as, for example, the use of the dynamic scope rule implemented using
A-lists.

COBOL
This too, like Lisp, is a language that dates back to the 1960s and here too the
name is an acronym: COBOL stands for COmmon Business Oriented Language.
The similarities between the two languages, however, end there. COBOL was in
fact designed with the aim of obtaining a speciﬁc language for business applications
whose syntax was as close as possible to that of the English language. After several
revisions of the initial language, which was designed by a group led by G. Hopper
at the US Department of Defence, the language became a standard in 1968, and,
although in revised and modiﬁed versions, is still in use today.

COBOL programs are composed of 4 “divisions”. The “procedure division” con-
tains the code for the algorithmic aspects of the program. In the “data division” we
ﬁnd the descriptions of the data. The “environment division” encloses the speciﬁca-
tion of the environment external to the program provided by the physical machine
on which the language is implemented. Finally, there is the “identiﬁcation division”,
which contains information used to identify the program (name, author, etc.). The
purpose of this organisation is both to separate, albeit in a crude way, the data from
the programs that use it, and to separate the machine-dependent aspects from the
independent ones. They are rudimentary mechanisms, surpassed by the linguistic
tools we have seen exist in modern languages (types, abstract data types, objects,
modules, intermediate code, etc.). Moreover, this program structure, together with
the syntax close to natural language, makes even the simplest programs quite long.
Memory management is entirely static.

Simula
Simula, another descendent of Algol 60, is a textbook case of a technology that
was too advanced for its time. Developed from 1962 at the Norwegian Computing
Centre by K. Nygaard and O.J. Dahl, Simula is an extension of Algol. It was

16.4 1970s

527

designed for discrete-event simulation applications, that is, for the implementation of
programs that simulate load and queue situations so that fundamental parameters can
be measured (average waiting time, length of the queue, etc.). In its most important
version, Simula67, the language introduced the concepts of class, object, subtype,
and dynamic method dispatch.2 Simula67 was without a doubt the ﬁrst object-
oriented language, and it had a considerable inﬂuence on its successors (Smalltalk
and C++), even if the anthropomorphic metaphor of objects exchanging messages
through methods would only arrive with Smalltalk and its volcanic creator, Alan
Kay.

From the linguistic viewpoint, Simula67 makes small modiﬁcations to the con-
structs that were already present in Algol 60 (the most important of which is the
default mode for passing parameters which is changed from name to value-result)
but adds various mechanisms, among which call-by-reference, pointers, coroutines
(a mechanism for deﬁning concurrent procedures that is fairly close to the modern
concept of thread, or of generators), classes and objects. A class in Simula is a pro-
cedure that, when it terminates, leaves its activation record on the stack and returns a
pointer to it. An activation record of this kind, which contains the variables declared
local to the procedure (today we would say: instance variables) and (pointers to)
local functions (methods), is an object. Subtypes, dynamic dispatch, and inheritance
are already present in Simula67, while later versions introduced other abstraction
mechanisms.

Simula has always had a big impact even outside the academic world, e.g., it is
possible to ﬁnd applications written in this language more than 40 years after its
release.

The Birth of Concurrency

As we mentioned in Sect. 14.2, the 1960s also saw the birth of the ﬁrst constructs for
concurrent programming. These were low-level constructs, employed in operating
systems, needed to handle the concurrency introduced into computation by device
controllers and their interrupt-based communication mechanisms. From a theoretical
point of view, in these years, the ﬁrst synchronisation problems began to be studied,
trying to identify conditions and constructs that would guarantee the independence
of the execution of parallel processes (A. Bernstein) and mutual exclusion (E.W.
Dijkstra). As already mentioned, semaphores were introduced in these years (they
were already present in Algol 68). The classic problem of synchronisation of the
dining philosophers also dates back to this period.

16.4 1970s

Thanks to the advent of the microprocessor, the 1970s saw the rise of the mini-
computer, computers of smaller size and power comparable to that of the older
mainframes.

2 Methods are called virtual procedures in Simula.

528

16 Short Historical Perspective

From a software point of view, batch processing gave way to a more interactive
approach where the user could interact directly with the execution of the program
via a terminal. The characteristics of the languages developed in the mainframe
era were not suited to interactive systems. For example, it became necessary to
express more sophisticated operations for input and output (that were previously
limited to reading and writing ﬁles). In interactive systems, moreover, there are
constraints on the response time. Thus, new languages included linguistic constructs
of a temporal nature (for example, timeout mechanisms). In general, “traditional”
high-level languages from the 1970s allow more direct interaction with the machine
than was possible with the languages of the previous generation.

By “traditional”, above, we mean the imperative languages inspired by the clas-
sical computational model based on the modiﬁcation of values stored in memory
locations. The 1970s, however, saw the birth of two new programming paradigms:
object-oriented programming and declarative programming, the latter in the two
ﬂavours of functional and logic programming. Below we will see some of the most
common languages of these years.

C

Among the new languages of the 1970s, the most important is probably C, a language
designed by Dennis Ritchie and Ken Thompson at AT&T Bell Laboratories. Origi-
nally designed as a systems programming language for the Unix operating system, C
soon became a general-purpose language, although systems programming remains
one of its more important applications. By way of an anecdote, its name derives from
the fact that in 1972 it was the successor language to the B language, which in turn
was a lightweight version of the BCPL system language.

Compared with the languages in the Algol family, from which it inherited many
characteristics, C offers more opportunities to access the low-level functionality of the
machine and to program interactive systems. In C, it is possible to have direct access
to the character input from a terminal. Or it is possible to use speciﬁc commands to
process data in real time. C rapidly established itself, both for system programming
and as a language for general use, thanks to these characteristics, its compact syntax,
and the possibility of compiling its programs into efﬁcient machine code.

In the previous chapters, we saw numerous references to C for speciﬁc constructs
or implementation techniques. Let us recall just some of these. We have seen how
C includes many assignment operators and, especially, how the block structure is
simpler than that of the languages of the Algol family (basically, C does not allow
nested functions). This supports a much simpler handling of environments and, there-
fore, of the passing of functions as parameters. C has pointers that can be directly
manipulated and, moreover, allows to use arrays through pointers and viceversa. On
one hand, these characteristics allow for powerful and efﬁcient operations. On the
other, they may cause insidious errors. Together with the lack of a strong type sys-
tem, they are one of the critical points of the language. Indeed, when one wants more
reliability than efﬁciency, one can ﬁnd valid alternatives in other modern languages.

16.4 1970s

Pascal

529

Pascal was developed around 1970 by Niklaus Wirth as a development and simpliﬁ-
cation of Algol W and was the most used educational language right up to the early
1990s. The name is in honour of the mathematician (as well as physicist, philosopher,
and writer) Blaise Pascal—who, to help a father overloaded by a difﬁcult job as part
of the administration of Normandy, in 1642 designed an “arithmetic machine”, the
precursor of mechanical calculating machines.

One of the main reasons for the success and fame of Pascal is that it was the
ﬁrst language that, preceding Java and its bytecodes by nearly 20 years, introduced
the concept of intermediate code as an instrument for program portability. A Pascal
program was translated by the Pascal compiler (which was also written in Pascal) into
P-code. P-code was a language for an intermediate machine with a stack architecture,
which was then implemented in an interpretative way on the host machine. In this
way, to port Pascal to a different machine, it was only necessary to rewrite the P-code
interpreter. Pascal also had a fully compiled implementation, which did not use an
intermediate machine and allowed for greater efﬁciency.

Here we list some of the more important properties of Pascal, in an attempt to

compare them with C.

Pascal is a block-structured language where functions and blocks that can be
nested with arbitrary complexity. This on the one hand increases the structuring
of code; on the other hand, it complicates the handling of the environment and the
mechanisms for passing functions as parameters. Pascal (like C), uses the static scope
rule and includes dynamic memory management both using a stack (for activation
records) and a heap (for explicitly allocated memory). The Pascal type system is
fairly extensive and supports abstraction mechanisms by allowing the user to deﬁne
new types using the type primitive. The types are mostly checked statically by the
compiler, even if some checks may be performed only at runtime. Pascal has explicit
pointers, albeit without the dangerous pointer arithmetic that C allows. Moreover,
arrays and pointers are different types, thus limiting the danger of pointer manipu-
lation. In its search for a reliable type system, Pascal is perhaps too restrictive as far
as arrays are concerned. In fact, two arrays containing values of the same type but of
different dimensions are of two different types, a property that makes the design of
array manipulating procedures difﬁcult. Another limitation of the language, at least
in its original version, is the lack of separately compilable modules, although this has
been solved in many subsequent implementations by deﬁning external procedures.

Smalltalk

A strong limitation of Pascal, like all “conventional” programming languages from
the 1970s, was the lack of mechanisms to support encapsulation and information
hiding in an effective manner. Pascal supports the deﬁnition of new data types, but
there is no way to couple these new types with operations that should manipulate
them, so that abstraction over data could be guaranteed.

Smalltalk presents a novel way to integrate mechanisms for encapsulation and
information hiding using the concepts of class and object (previously introduced by

530

16 Short Historical Perspective

Simula) and precise visibility rules for classes (methods are public, instance vari-
ables are private). Developed during the 1970s by Alan Kay and his group at Xerox
PARC,3 Smalltalk is a unique language. We saw some of its characteristics in
Chap. 10, but their complete description would require much more space than what
is available here. Unlike some object-oriented languages that were introduced later
(for example, C++), Smalltalk was designed from the start to include as primitive
the concept of objects rather than grafting it onto an existing language. This means
that all the mechanisms used in its implementation (procedure call, memory manage-
ment, etc.) were developed using this concept. Moreover, Smalltalk was designed not
only to be a language but also as a sort of “total system”, which included language,
programming environment, and also a special dedicated machine for increased efﬁ-
ciency of program execution. Indeed, given that the language’s type system is entirely
dynamic, the implementation of an efﬁcient method lookup mechanism was quite
difﬁcult. Very soon, however, implementations of Smalltalk were also proposed for
conventional machines, with satisfactory results. A standard has never been deﬁned
for Smalltalk and various, quite different, versions of the language coexisted for a
long time.

Declarative Languages

We introduced in Chap. 6 the difference between imperative and declarative pro-
gramming. The motto of declarative programming is that the activity of program-
ming should concentrate on what needs to be done, leaving the language interpreter
to concentrate on how to achieve the desired result. Imperative programming, on the
other hand, requires the programmer to specify both the what and the how. This is,
of course, an ideal vision. Leaving to the interpreter to decide how to do the com-
putation (that is, essentially, memory management and ﬂow control), without the
programmer providing any guidance in this sense, may impose a large penalty on
program efﬁciency. In reality, alongside the “pure” version of declarative languages
that corresponds to this vision, we ﬁnd “impure” versions that add constructs of an
imperative nature to improve the efﬁciency of programs and also to allow the use of
more traditional commands (e.g. assignments).

Declarative languages can be divided into functional and logic programming lan-
guages. We will look at the two main representatives of the two classes, both of
which were introduced in the 1970s.

ML

ML was born as Meta Language (hence its name) for a semi-automatic system
for proving properties of programs and was developed by Robin Milner’s group

3 The Palo Alto Research Center of Xerox Corp. was a mythical research centre in those years. In
addition to Smalltalk, the following were all PARC innovations: Ethernet; laser-printer technology
(later developed by Adobe, a PARC spin-off); PostScript; the ﬁrst personal computer (the Alto)
for “ofﬁce automation”, equipped with a graphical user interface using the desktop metaphor; the
remote procedure call.

16.4 1970s

531

at Edinburgh, starting in the mid-1970s. Very soon, it became a true programming
language that could be used for the manipulation of symbolic information.

In ML, as in Lisp, a program consists of a set of function deﬁnitions. Various
imperative constructs were added to the purely functional part of ML, in particular
the assignment (limited to so-called “reference cells”, sort of modiﬁable containers
bound to names in a reference model of variables.)

One of the most important contributions of ML concerned types. The language
was indeed provided with a safe type, static system, which in various ways extended
the types of other languages of the same period. First, the concept of type safety
has a rigorous and precise deﬁnition. The system excludes (in a provable way) the
possibility of unsignalled runtime errors, deriving from type violations. The ML
type checker statically determines the type of every expression in a program. The
language guarantees that if the type checker determines that an expression has a
certain type T, then every evaluation of that expression will yield a value of type T.
Moreover, the ML type system supports a type inference mechanism. The pro-
grammer can leave some information about types unspeciﬁed, and the system will
use some form of logical inference to infer the type of an identiﬁer from how it is
used. Similar mechanisms were previously studied in the context of the λ-calculus:
ML was the ﬁrst programming language to be equipped with such an automatic
type-inference mechanism. Finally, ML supports parametric polymorphism.

PROLOG

Prolog was deﬁned in the 1970s as well. This was the ﬁrst logic-programming
language and is still available today in various versions and implementations.

If some ideas on logic programming can be traced back to the work of Kurt
Gödel and Jacques Herbrand, the ﬁrst solid theoretical bases were published by Alan
Robinson who, in the 1960s, made an essential contribution to the theory of automatic
deduction. Robinson provided a formal deﬁnition of the uniﬁcation algorithm and
deﬁned resolution, a deduction mechanism that uses uniﬁcation and that supports
the proof of theorems in ﬁrst-order logic.

Given its simplicity, resolution is perfect for implementing automatic theorem
provers (for ﬁrst-order logic), but it does not provide a computational mechanism
such as the one normally provided by a programming language. The proof of a
theorem does not produce an “observable” result that could be seen as the result
of a computation. To obtain this computational vision of the activity of proof, 10
years had to pass and a restricted version of resolution had to be developed. This
version is SLD resolution, proposed by Robert Kowalski in 1974. SLD resolution
unlike previous mechanisms for automated theorem proving, allows one to prove a
formula by explicitly computing the values of the variables that make the formula
itself true. Therefore, at the end of the proof, those values constitute the result of the
computation. If Kowalski deﬁned the theoretical model, the Prolog language was
developed by Pierre Roussel and Alain Colmerauer who, in 1970, were working on a
formalism for manipulating natural language, exploiting automatic theorem-proving
mechanisms. These experiments led to the ﬁrst implementation of Prolog in 1972
and then, after various interactions with Robert Kowalski, to the 1973 version which

532

16 Short Historical Perspective

is mostly the same as the current versions. The ISO Prolog standard was deﬁned
in the 1990s.

The First Concurrent Languages

The 1970s saw the development of the ﬁrst concurrent languages, both in a theoreti-
cal and practical sense. Particularly important from the theoretical point of view was
the introduction of so-called process calculi or process algebras.4 These formalisms
allow concurrent systems to be modelled with mathematical precision, using a few
primitive constructs to express interaction, communication (typically by message
exchange), and process synchronisation. Associated with these calculi, we have
algebraic laws and formal semantics that allow various properties of the compu-
tations to be veriﬁed. The ﬁrst, fundamental contributions in this ﬁeld were those
of Robin Milner, who introduced the Calculus of Communicating Systems (CCS),
in the second half of the 1970s, and those of Tony Hoare, who, in 1978, published
his work on Communicating Sequential Processes (CSP), a calculus of processes
that later developed into the Occam programming language. These years also saw
the ﬁrst important theoretical contributions to the proof of properties such as partial
correctness, mutual exclusion, and deadlock-free concurrent systems. Important in
this respect were the works of Susan Owicki, David Gries, and Leslie Lamport.

Monitors developed in the 1970s mainly thanks to a famous article by Hoare
in 1974, although the initial idea of encapsulating data to control access to shared
variables in a concurrent environment is attributed to Edsger Dijkstra (1971) and Per
Brinch Hansen (1972). The latter introduced Concurrent Pascal in 1975, the ﬁrst
concurrent language to adopt monitors. Brinch Hansen was also one of the ﬁrst to
come up with the idea of RPC (remote procedure call). Several other languages of
this period used monitors, among them Modula, developed by Niklaus Wirth and
CSP/k, developed by Ric Holt.

Finally, the 1970s were also the years of major development of the Unix operating
system, which included system calls to handle concurrency such as fork, wait,
and exit.

16.5 1980s

The 1980s were dominated by the development of the personal computer (PC). The
ﬁrst commercial PC can be considered to be the Apple II, produced by Apple in
1978. Today, with the massive increase in the use of computing devices in everyday
life, the PC seems an indispensable tool, but when it ﬁrst appeared, most people
remained sceptical about its potential. Even in 1977, Ken Olson, the president of
Digital Equipment Corp. (a major producer of minicomputers at that time), stated

4 The latter terminology, however, was introduced later, in the 1980s.

16.5 1980s

Ada Byron Lovelace

533

The name of the Ada language is a tribute to Ada Byron, Countess of Lovelace (1815–1852).
Daughter of the poet George Byron, she was one of the ﬁrst female ﬁgures in the history of auto-
matic computing. She was a great supporter of Charles Babbage (1792–1871), a mathematician
at the University of Cambridge and modern calculating machine pioneer. Babbage designed two
calculating machines (the “analytic” and the “difference” engines) which were well ahead of their
time and were of such technical complexity that they could not be built. In 1842, the Italian math-
ematician L. Menabrea published a memoir in French on Babbage’s analytic engine. In 1843, Ada
Lovelace translated it into English, adding several notes, where we can ﬁnd a farseeing account of
a calculating machine for general use.

that he did not see any reason for anyone to want to have a computer in their home!
This initial confusion evaporated when, in 1981, IBM launched its ﬁrst PC and Lotus
created the ﬁrst electronic spreadsheet. This application made people immediately
see the possibilities of the new technology, which went into general use in 1984. In
that year, Apple released onto the market the Macintosh—for the ﬁrst time a computer
for the general public had an operating system with a graphical interface based on
windows, icons, and a mouse—a system similar to the windowing interface that we
still use today. Later (in the 1990s), Microsoft also introduced its own Windows
system.

The role of programming languages has been completely transformed by the PC.
The development of systems for personal use, which provide easy-to-use graphical
interfaces, brought the need to develop easily interactive graphical systems to manage
windowed interfaces. These systems are produced using large and complex programs,
which makes it essential to reuse already existing code (possibly produced by others).
Thus, these platforms provided an application area that is ideal for object-oriented
languages which provide natural mechanisms for code reuse and for organising vast
and complex software projects. Indeed, the languages of the 1980s were mostly
conceived as object-oriented languages, which saw signiﬁcant development during
this period and their ﬁrst large commercial applications.

In this decade, the ﬁrst embedded systems were also developed. These are systems
composed of computers connected to physical devices which perform control tasks
(for example, motors, parts of industrial machinery, domestic electrical goods, etc.).
Embedded systems pose many problems, most of all relating to the reliability and
correctness of programs. For a program that controls the engines of an aircraft, an
error must not be handled interactively by the programmer and termination of the
program is not an acceptable option. Moreover, embedded systems introduce other
problems as far as response time is concerned. These problems are tackled by so-
called real-time programming languages.

534

C++

16 Short Historical Perspective

The ﬁrst version of C++ was deﬁned in 1986 by Bjarne Stroustrup at AT&T’s Bell
Laboratories, after years of work (and after the deﬁnition of several other languages)
devoted to ﬁguring out how to add classes and inheritance to the C language with-
out sacriﬁcing efﬁciency and without compromising compatibility with existing C
programs. C had to remain a subset of C++, so that any legal C program should
be accepted and translated by the C++ compiler. To these primary objectives, the
improvement of C’s type system was added.

These objectives were substantially achieved. Even if there are some inconsisten-
cies between C++ and C, most C programs are accepted by a C++ compiler. There
was signiﬁcant effort to obtain a language in which those constructs that are not used
by a program do not exert a negative inﬂuence on the efﬁciency of the program itself.
This means, in particular, that the C subset of C++ must not be affected in any way
by the presence of objects and the structures required to handle them. C++ does not
use any form of garbage collector, so it remains compatible with C, and it is still as
efﬁcient.

The static type system was improved and, in C++, it is possible to use a generic
form of class, called a template, which supports a form of parametric polymorphism.
An important design decision was that of handling C++ objects as a generalisation
of the structures (struct) in C. As a consequence, C++ objects can be allocated in
activation records on the stack and, unlike Simula (and Java), they can be manipulated
directly and not only through pointers. An assignment in C++ can then copy an object
to the memory space that was occupied by another object, rather than just changing
a pointer (a reference).

The method lookup mechanism in C++ is simpler and more efﬁcient than that in
Smalltalk, given that C++ may use information provided by the static type system
(which does exist in Smalltalk).

Finally, C++ has multiple inheritance, with all its implementation challenges. The

standard version of C++ was approved in 1996.

Ada

Another important language deﬁned in the 1980s is Ada, whose project was spon-
sored by the US Department of Defense. The language was deﬁned in a rather unusual
way, starting with a call for proposals from the Department of Defence, which set out
the design requirements and was open to several research groups, both academic and
industrial. The call was won by Jean Ichbiah in 1979 with a language based on Pas-
cal which included many new constructs for programming real-time and embedded
systems, as well as other kinds of systems. Ichbiah’s proposal included abstract data
types, tasks, timing mechanisms, and mechanisms for the concurrent execution of
tasks. This last feature introduced topics that were new to the commercial program-
ming languages of the time. Task is a simple concept: when task A calls task B, task
A continues to be executed while B executes (while in the case of standard subpro-
grams the execution of A is suspended while B executes). However, we already know
that the concurrent execution of two tasks poses problems of synchronisation, com-

16.5 1980s

535

munication, and management that require linguistic constructs and implementation
mechanisms (e.g. rendezvous, introduced and extensively used in this language).

The standard version of Ada was deﬁned in 1983, although the ﬁrst compilers did
not appear until 1986 due to conformance testing against the standard—perhaps a
unique occurrence in the history of programming languages.

The Developments of Concurrent Languages

In addition to Ada, the 1980s saw the emergence of other languages for con-
current programming. Based on the CSP theoretical model the Occam language
was developed at INMOS, ﬁrst for programming transputer5 networks and later
also for other platforms. It is a language whose guiding principle is simplicity,
as its name suggests.6 Occam was the ﬁrst language to explicitly use channels.
In these years, in addition to the transputer, numerous parallel architectures were
developed, such as Intel’s hypercube architecture machines, the Connection Machine,
and Cray Research’s machines. Consequently, speciﬁc programming methodologies
and languages were also developed, although many of them were short-lived.

The term “process algebra” entered the literature when Jan Bergstra and Jan

Willem Klop developed their Algebra of Communicating Processes (ACP).

At the beginning of the 1980s, Gregory R. Andrews developed Synchronising
Resources (SR), a language designed for concurrent programming that had a cer-
tain following in the academic world. Also from these years is Linda, an alternative
computation model, deﬁned by Davide Gelernter, in which communication and syn-
chronisation take place via a structure shared by processes called the blackboard.

Various concurrent extensions to functional and logic languages were also deﬁned,
to achieve concurrent formalisms that retained the positive aspects of declarative
programming. Concurrent logic languages deﬁned in this period include PARLOG,
Concurrent Prolog, and Guarded Horn Clauses (GHC). The latter plays a special role
as it was one of the key players in the Japanese FGCS (Fifth Generation Computer
Systems) project. The project had colossal funding from the Japanese government
(a total of about 400 million US dollars at 1992 values) and was supposed to lead to
the realisation of a new generation of parallel computers, with superior performance
due to innovative architectures using GHC as machine language. In fact, despite the
many important scientiﬁc results obtained, the project was not a success and the
machines built were soon outperformed by other parallel computers.

5 The transputer is a series of microprocessors designed by INMOS in the 1980s for use in parallel
computing systems. Each transputer had its own memory and communication ports.
6 “Occam’s razor”, from the 14th century English friar William of Occam, is the philosophical
principle that “entities must not be multiplied beyond necessity”. It is taken as one of the principles
of modern scientiﬁc thought: “when explain a given phenomenon, one should prefer the explanation
that requires fewest assumptions”.

536

16 Short Historical Perspective

CLP
In the 1980s, Constrain Logic Programming languages (Clp) were introduced. These
are languages that allow the manipulation of relations over appropriate domains (see
Chap. 13). The idea of adding to logic programming a classical mechanism for
the solution of constraints was developed independently by three research groups.
Colmerauer and his group in Marseille was the ﬁrst to deﬁne a language with con-
straints in 1982. This language was Prolog II, an extension of Prolog which
allowed the use of equations and inequalities over terms (rational trees, to be pre-
cise). In the middle of the 1980s, the language was extended to Prolog III which
allowed generic constraints over strings, booleans and reals (limited to linear equa-
tions). At Monash University in Australia, the language Clp(R) was developed, with
constraints over reals. Jaffar and Lassez deﬁned the theoretical aspects of the Clp
paradigm. It was shown how all the various logic languages with constraints could
be seen as speciﬁc instances of this paradigm and how the paradigm inherits all the
main results from logic programming. Finally, Dincbas, van Hentenryck and others
at ECRC in Munich deﬁned Chip, an extension of Prolog which allowed various
types of constraint, in particular constraints over ﬁnite domains.

16.6 1990s

The 1990s, as we discussed in Sect. 15.1.2, saw the rise of the Internet and the World
Wide Web, two technologies that changed many aspects of computing, including pro-
gramming languages. New possibilities included connecting millions of computing
devices in a network, sharing data and programs that reside on machines separated
by thousands of kilometres, transmitting data and accessing saved information using
channels shared by thousands of users. All this potential introduced problems of
efﬁciency, reliability, correctness, and security that involve the entire spectrum of
levels present in a computer system—from the level of communication protocols to
the languages used for the ﬁnal applications.

From the programming language viewpoint, the most relevant aspect of these
years was the deﬁnition of the Java language. In the same decade, HTML (HyperText
Markup Language) was deﬁned by Tim Berners-Lee in 1989 to specify the content
of Web pages. HTML, although important, is not covered in this book because it is
not a programming language in the strict sense.

Java

The object-oriented language Java was developed by a group (the Green team) led
by James Gosling at Sun Microsystems. The original project, started in 1990, aimed
to deﬁne a language based on a new implementation of C++, that could be used in
small, relatively low-power computing devices connected to a network and linked to
a television set used as input/output peripheral. These devices were intended to be
a kind of ante litteram browser, used for purposes similar to modern web browsing,
long before all the necessary technology was available. The initial language, ﬁrst

16.6 1990s

537

available in a functioning version in 1992, was pretty much ignored. In 1993, however,
the release of Mosaic, the ﬁrst Internet browser, immediately caught the Green team’s
attention. They saw that the language they were working on had great potential in
the world of the Web. In fact, the low communication bandwidth available to home
computers and too many requests to servers for the most popular web pages made
early browsers painful to use. These problems could be solved, at least partially,
by sending little programs (applets) across the network, so that they execute on the
user’s client machine when it requests a particular service. In this way, Web pages
become more interactive (eliminating round-trips or sensibly reducing their weight
on the connection) and the load on the server from which the service is required is
reduced. The language to be used to implement such applets would have to satisfy
the following requirements:

Portability When a program is sent to a remote machine, the architecture of this
machine is not known. It is therefore necessary for each client machine to have
an implementation of the applet’s language. And this is all the more difﬁcult the
more the language is is large and complex.

Security Executing programs received remotely from the network requires precise

guarantees about the security and reliability of these programs.

Java was designed by taking into account these two basic requirements, in the

context of the object-oriented paradigm.

The ﬁrst problem was solved by deﬁning the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) and its
associated bytecode. A Java program is translated (compiled) into an intermediate
language—the Java bytecode—whose abstract machine is precisely the JVM. This
machine, which is much simpler than the entire Java machine, is implemented in an
interpretative mode on different physical machines. A Java program, once translated
to bytecodes, can therefore be sent over the network to be locally executed on the
user’s machine. The real applicability of this approach was shown in 1994, when
Sun developed the HotJava browser, with full support for Java applets through a
JVM included with the browser. It was in 1995 that Java started its rapid expansion,
when the JVM was incorporated into the Netscape browser (which, in its turn, was
a reincarnation of the Mosaic browser).

The security problem, on the other hand, was addressed by various techniques.
First, Java was designed with a type system guaranteeing type safety. The execution
of a Java program can not cause a runtime type error that is not detected and signalled
by the compiler or the abstract machine (at least for programs written making use only
of the sequential subset of the language). Type safety is obtained by type checking at
three levels. First, the Java compiler, like those for other statically typed languages,
does not permit the translation of programs violating the Java type system. Second,
the bytecodes that result from the compilation are also checked by a type checker
before execution and, ﬁnally, at runtime, the bytecode interpreter performs some type
checks which, by their nature, cannot be made statically (for example, array bound
checking).

538

16 Short Historical Perspective

Another important design choice in Java to improve the reliability and simplicity
of the language is the avoidance of explicit handling of pointers and the presence
of a garbage collector to recover unused memory. Thus, even if any Java object
is accessible using (an abstract version of) pointers and memory is dynamically
allocated, there is no “pointer” type. Let us recall that in Java values of basic types
(numbers, boolean, and characters) are not objects; names declared of these types
are true modiﬁable variables. On the other hand, variables representing objects use
the reference model (recall Sect. 6.2.1), and thus a program only handles indirect
references to objects, without being allowed to freely manipulate those references.
Scoping is static and parameter passing is always by value (where objects are passed,
the value passed is a reference to the object, thus realising a parameter passing by
object reference, see the box on Sect. 7.1.2).

In addition to dynamic method dispatch, which is typical of object-oriented lan-
guages, Java also allows the dynamic loading of classes. During execution, if a
program invokes a method on a class that is not present and which, for example,
resides in a physically remote location on the network, the class can be dynamically
loaded into the Java virtual machine. This incremental approach allows programs to
start executing even though some of their components are still missing, something
which has been of practical use for browsers.

Finally, as we saw in Sect. 14.7, Java allows multiple threads to run concurrently.
Synchronisation and communication primitives form an important part of Java’s
design and contribute to the portability of the language since they do not refer to the
system operations of a speciﬁc platform.

All these security and reliability features have a cost in terms of efﬁciency. The
existence of runtime type checks, the bytecode interpreter, the garbage collector, and
several other aspects signiﬁcantly affect the execution time of programs. However,
this inefﬁciency is not particularly important for the application domain typical of
Java programs. In particular, in the context of web browsers, the time spent waiting
for network communications makes the execution times of Java applets negligible.

The Dynamic Four: Python, JavaScript, PHP, and Ruby

Besides the explosive success of Java, the 1990s saw the introduction of four pro-
gramming languages which would become some of the most popular ones of the
following decades. These are Python (1991), JavaScript (1995), PHP (1995), and
Ruby (1995).

The foremost commonality of the Four is that they are dynamically typed, inter-
preted, scripting languages. The category of scripting languages takes its name from
the support that these languages provide in letting users quickly specify “scripts”—
one can draw a parallel with the namesake written text of a play that describes
the actions of actors—that coordinate the interactions among different facilities
(resources, instructions, tools) provided by an existing system. For example, if we
look at operating systems, examples of scripting languages are the Bourne shell
(introduced in 1979) for Unix systems and the batch ﬁle language (from the early
1980s) for DOS/Windows. These languages allow the user to compose commands

16.6 1990s

539

of the operating system in a structured way (e.g., execute command X, capture its
output, compare the latter with some constant and either execute command Y or Z).
Since the purpose of scripting languages is to rapidly put together a small application
that coordinates other programs (e.g., the commands of the operating system), they
are usually interpreted rather than compiled.

Scripting languages are a staple element of vast software environments, such as
operating systems. However, they are common in other classes of software applica-
tions that require the coordination of a multitude of functionalities, like text editors—
e.g., EMACS (1976) is famous for its ﬂexibility thanks to its deep integration with
LISP, used as its scripting language—and computer games—Lua, a scripting lan-
guage that appeared in this decade (1993), can still be found in games developed 30
years after its introduction.

Python, JavaScript, PHP, and Ruby fall into this category of languages, although

they present relevant differences regarding their main application contexts.

Python, developed by Guido van Rossum, sees the conﬂuence of two traditions.
The ﬁrst is that of interpreted languages with a simple syntax, intended for teaching
(e.g., by replacing scope brackets with indentation, to also enforce consistent code-
formatting conventions) and prototyping. The second is that of scripting languages
for operating systems. For instance, one of the key points for the development of
Python was to ease working with ﬁles and common data structures such as lists,
associative arrays (called “dictionaries”), and sets through constructs like collec-
tion comprehension—a terse syntax to generate collections of elements inspired by
the set-builder notation—and generators (see Sect 7.2.2). The simplicity and high
modularity of Python played a crucial role in attracting contributions from disparate
communities (e.g., data science and scientiﬁc computing), which helped to increase
the diffusion of the language.

The popularity of the other three languages is linked to the rise of the Web. PHP
(originally deﬁned as the acronym for Personal Home Page language) and Ruby
became renowned for easing the building of server-side Web pages.

The origins of PHP are linked to the Common Gateway Interface (CGI), a standard
that appeared in 1993 to regulate how Web servers can execute external programs. The
lack of portability and complexity of using compiled languages for CGI motivated
the original author of PHP, Rasmus Lerdorf, to create a language whose interpreter
would “live” next to the Web server (deeply integrated with CGI) and whose syntax
would make it easy to generate content—e.g., PHP allows users to embed Web-page
markup in programs, and it provides built-in facilities to interact with databases.

The motivating origins of Ruby follow those of Python—a simple language for
fast prototyping. In particular, its developer, Yukihiro Matsumoto, wanted a scripting
language built around foundations that permeated all aspects of the language, so that,
by knowing these foundations, users would quickly grasp how the constructs of the
language worked. The author called this the “principle of least surprise”. For example,
one foundation of the language is object orientation, and all values in the language are
objects (including primitive values, classes, and types); another is that all instructions
are expressions (even statements), which return values, and that all instructions are
executed imperatively (even declarations). The language rose in popularity with the

540

16 Short Historical Perspective

wide adoption of Ruby on Rails, a framework that helped in standardising the way
to build and deploy Web applications.

The last of the Four, JavaScript, owes its fame to being one of the ﬁrst languages
able to run in Web browsers—so, we can see it as complementary to the PHP and Ruby
server-side programs discussed above. JavaScript is also famous for another record:
being one of the prominent misnomers in the history of Computer Science. Indeed,
a candid interpretation of the name “JavaScript” hints at an interpreted version of
(and for scripting with) Java. The (maybe more interesting) reality is that the name
was a clever move by Netscape to exploit the popularity of Java and promote the
new client-side scripting language included in their browser. Legend has it that the
author of JavaScript, Brendan Eich, had only a few weeks to modify the LISP-like
language (Scheme) he was embedding into the browser and make it as syntactically
similar to Java as possible. In particular, and differently from Java, JavaScript adopts
prototype-based object orientation (cf. the “Classless languages” box on Sect. 10.2.2)
and (inherited from its LISP origins) it supports ﬁrst-class functions. Subsequent
runtimes allowed programmers to run JavaScript applications outside Web browsers
(e.g., for server-side scripting), which further contributed to increasing the popularity
of the language.

The Functional Duo: Haskell and OCaml

The 1990s also saw the introduction of two functional programming languages,
Haskell (1990) and OCaml (1996), which, in different ways, contributed to exper-
imenting with, evolving, and disseminating functional programming constructs.
They became inﬂuential progenitors of many languages introduced in the follow-
ing decades.

Haskell is a pure, side-effect-free (cf. Chap. 11) functional language introduced
by the late 1980s functional-programming community. Haskell aimed to focus the
efforts of the community on growing a single, comprehensive programming language
and using it to promote the adoption of the functional paradigm. Thus, Haskell was
designed to support a broad set of features found in other functional languages of the
time. Moreover, it had to be ﬂexible enough to allow researchers to quickly design,
implement, and disseminate their ideas within the community. The language also had
the objective of being a technology for building real applications, so that it would
work as a vehicle to spread the usage of the functional paradigm (for real-world
applications, as well as in teaching).

As a consequence, Haskell inherited many, widely-adopted features of pure func-

tional languages that preceded it, among which:

(cid:129) Being founded on the call-by-need/lazy evaluation strategy (cf. Sect. 11.2.3);
(cid:129) An advanced type system extensively based on abstract data types (cf. Sect. 9.1)
and algebraic data types—we saw examples of the latter when we presented tagged
unions/sum types (cf. Sect. 8.4.3) and product types/records (cf. Sect. 8.4.1);

16.6 1990s

541

(cid:129) Type classes, which, at their basic level, are constructs of the type system intro-
duced to support ad-hoc polymorphism through the deﬁnition of constraints on
parametrically polymorphic types (cf. Sect.8.7.2);

(cid:129) The deep integration of pattern matching (cf. Sect. 11.3.3) in the language and
its strong synergy with algebraic data types (e.g., to express choices with tagged
unions and deconstruct records);

(cid:129) The (optional) use of indentation to structure declarations for readability and

teaching.

The language is famous also for spreading concepts from the functional tradition
(as per its stated purpose) like the usage of algebraic data types such as Option (cf.
Sect. 8.4.3) and the Either/Maybe types and the introduction of monads (since its
1996 incarnation) to handle compositionality and side effects.

The second language of the Duo is OCaml. As its name suggests, the language
is an offspring of the Caml language (introduced in the mid-1980s), itself a dialect
of the ML family (cf. Sect. 11.8). Both languages are projects developed by several
researchers at the French Institute for Research in Computer Science and Automa-
tion (INRIA). OCaml owes its preﬁxing “O” to the prominent addition of an object
layer that allows users to mix the functional and object-oriented styles. The lan-
guage inherited and evolved many traits from the ML tradition, such as imperative
control constructs, an ML-like static type system with advanced type inference fea-
tures, parametric polymorphism, and pattern matching. In addition to its linguis-
tic characteristics, OCaml enjoys the results of decades of research devoted to the
improvement of the Caml runtime (of course, optimised to run the constructs of the
language), which allowed it to equip an interactive interpreter (for fast prototyping),
a byte-code compiler (for portability), and a native-code compiler (for performance).
These elements greatly contributed to helping OCaml gain a strong presence in the
industry, where the language has been largely used to implement low-level tools for
operating systems, to develop Web applications, and (most famously) in the ﬁnancial
sector.

The Libraries for Concurrency

Despite the development of several speciﬁc languages for concurrent program-
ming, such as those mentioned in the previous sections, much of current concurrent
programming uses a traditional sequential language augmented with appropriate
libraries that realize the functionality needed to handle concurrency. Many of these
libraries were deﬁned in the 1990s.

In particular, in the mid-1990s, the Pthreads library was deﬁned as part of the
POSIX (Portable Operating System Interface for Unix) family of standards. This is
a set of C routines that allow a normal C program to be multithreaded using a dozen
functions for thread management and synchronisation.

Two widely used packages for concurrent programming with message exchange
are Parallel Virtual Machine (PVM) and Message Passing Interface (MPI). Both
of these libraries allow processes in a distributed environment to be built using

542

16 Short Historical Perspective

programs written in a sequential language (typically C or Fortran), which then
communicate and synchronise by calling PVM or MPI functions. The functionality
offered by the two libraries is similar, although PVM allows greater ﬂexibility in
handling heterogeneous machines and faults, while MPI supports a greater variety
of communication primitives.

Packages for distributed programming that support message exchange and remote
method invocation are also available in Java, as we saw at the end of Sect. 14.7 talking
about java.net, java.rmi, and java.rmi.server.

In the area of theory, an important contribution of the 1990s was the deﬁnition of
the π -calculus by Robin Milner, Joachim Parrow, and David Walker. This is a calculus
that develops the work begun with CCS by introducing the possibility of describing
mobile systems whose conﬁguration varies dynamically. Variations and extensions
of the π -calculus are also used to describe biological and economic systems.

16.7 2000s

The 2000s saw the introduction of the service-oriented programming paradigm (cf.
Sect. 15.1.4) and of the languages discussed in Chap. 15, dedicated to the description
of service interfaces (e.g., WSDL), orchestration (e.g., BPEL) and choreography
(e.g., WS-CDL).

Apart from these new paradigm proposals, the 2000s witnessed a sort of slowdown
in the appearance of new, popular programming languages. This does not mean that
new languages were not introduced in those years, but rather that these proposals
struggled to attract the attention of programmers that, at the time, was shared between
long-time strongholds, like C and (the slightly more recent) C++, and newcomers
like Java, PHP, and Python.

A language that succeeded in gaining some attention is C#. Introduced in 2000
by Microsoft, C# is a language much closer (in features) to Java and C++ than its
eponymous father, C. Among their objectives, the designers of C# wanted to promote
the adoption of the .NET framework—a technology based on the Common Language
Infrastructure which, similar to the Java runtime, supports the compilation of high-
level programs into intermediate-language ones, able to run on different platforms
and computer architectures. The language is object-oriented, garbage-collected, and
type-safe (à la Java) but also supports “unsafe” blocks, where the programmer can
directly manage the memory addresses of pointers. Along with C#, in 2005, Microsoft
introduced F#, which is a functional language directly inﬂuenced by OCaml. Also
in this case, the language was intended to marry the desirable linguistic features of
its inspirer with the facilities provided by the .NET framework.

We mention this duo of “sharp” languages also because they illustrate a phe-
nomenon, started in this decade, where we consistently see cross-pollination from
functional to object-oriented languages—i.e., where the latter adopt concepts and
constructs introduced and proved useful by the former. Indeed, while F# has a smaller

16.7 2000s

543

userbase than C#, it has been serving as a test bed to introduce new language con-
structs that eventually reached the more mainstream C#.

A similar phenomenon happened between Java and another popular language

introduced in this decade: Scala.

Scala

Work on Scala started in 2001, driven by Martin Odersky. The name “Scala” is the
blend of the words “scalable” and “language” and it was given to convey one of the
objectives behind the design of the language. Scala shall scale according to the needs
of the user. More concretely, the design of the language strived to introduce syntactic
facilities that helped users in deﬁning, within the language itself, domain-speciﬁc
languages.

The idea behind using a domain-speciﬁc language (DSL) is that, instead of mod-
elling one’s problem to ﬁt the abstractions of a general-purpose language—where
the programmer needs to ﬁgure out a way to represent the entities of their problem’s
domain as, e.g., objects and methods—the user can deﬁne a DSL where those enti-
ties are ﬁrst-class citizens. The semantics of the DSL deﬁnes the way to solve the
problem. Examples of famous DSLs are HTML, for Web pages, and TEX (1978) and
LATEX (1984), for document preparation. In the case of Scala, the user writes the
DSL as a “guest” language embedded within the “host” (Scala), which the developer
uses to describe both the DSL’s syntax and to implement its semantics.

To achieve this ﬂexibility, Scala integrates concepts and language constructs from
object-oriented and functional programming. It is a class-based language where all
values are objects. Moreover, it is deeply integrated with traits (which the language
helped popularise) as a middle ground between interface implementation—where a
class must implement a set of method signatures—and multiple inheritance—where
a class acquires method implementations from other classes. Scala has also full-
ﬂedged functional language features, like ﬁrst-class, higher-order functions, pattern
matching, lazy evaluation, and currying.

In addition to the above design principles, the implementation of Scala was tar-
geted to overcome the perceived limitations of the contemporary version of Java.
This motivated the implementation of a compiler for Scala that targets the Java Vir-
tual Machine and, thanks to byte-code compatibility, that allows Scala programs to
include and handle Java classes.

In the following years, Java would (indirectly) integrate features ﬁrst appeared
in Scala and tested by its programmers, like advanced type-inference mecha-
nisms, reﬁned generics (cf. Sect.10.4.2) with covariance-contravariance overriding
(cf. Sect.10.4.5), functional interfaces, pattern matching, and sealed classes and
interfaces (similar to traits).

544

16.8 2010s

16 Short Historical Perspective

The landscape of programming languages in the 2010s witnessed two main trends,
which motivated the introduction of new proposals and the evolution of existing ones.
On the one hand, we see new languages that try to “dethrone” the position of C. At
large, these new proposals aim to allow developers to implement programs that are
as performant as their C alternatives (e.g., in speed and memory occupation) but with
increased support for correctness and safety. On the other hand, we see proposals
that introduce static guarantees on dynamically-typed languages via extensions that
modulate the amount of typing information the programmer must provide.

The C Contenders: Go, Rust, and Swift

Since its debut, C gained and subsequently maintained a strong position as the lan-
guage one would use to implement performance-critical software. Moreover, there is
a folklore argument among programmers whereby C is their go-to language thanks
to its small set of features and straightforward execution model—as opposed to the
larger set of language constructs and the more complex runtime of alternatives, like
C++ or Java, which can make it harder to reason on the behaviour of programs.
Notwithstanding these good characteristics, any programmer with at least a little
experience with C would recognise its many limitations (by modern standards), like
error-prone memory-management primitives and minimal support for type-checking
and structured error handling.

In this decade, we ﬁnd several new languages that present themselves as con-
tenders for C, i.e., languages that support programmers in writing correct programs
that are also efﬁcient. In the following, we introduce three of the most famous.

Go is the oldest of these contenders and, although missing the 2010s mark by
a couple of months (it ﬁrst appeared in November 2009), we can safely classify it
among the languages that characterised the decade. The language was developed
within Google by Robert Griesemer, Robert Pike, and Ken Thompson (of C fame).
The inﬂuence of C on Go relates also to its simplicity. Indeed, besides the close
resemblance of Go’s syntax to that of C, Go includes some features to further simplify
it. For example, the language is structurally typed, it requires minimal annotations
from the user thanks to type inference, and it is generally type-safe—although, like
e.g., C# and Rust (the latter, discussed below), Go provides instructions to bypass
the type system and express low-level logic, e.g., pointer arithmetic. Another feature
is that Go provides inbuilt, syntactic support for concurrency through lightweight
processes (called “goroutines”) that communicate via channels (cf. Sect. 14.3.1) à la
CSP/CCS. Another relevant feature that positions Go in the group of C contenders
is a compiler that, although employing garbage collection for memory management,
produces efﬁcient executables.

Rust, initially developed as a personal project by Graydon Hoare, in 2010, became
a project ofﬁcially sponsored by the employer of Hoare, Mozilla—a free software
community founded by members of Netscape. Like Go, also Rust’s syntax builds on
that of C (with OCaml as a second strong inﬂuencer). A distinctive characteristic that

16.8 2010s

545

contributed to the popularity of Rust is its usage of types and lifetimes of variables
to produce efﬁcient programs. Indeed, Rust popularised the usage of an ownership
system to obtain automatic memory management without the necessity of garbage
collectors. Roughly, this is possible because each value in Rust is attached to a
variable, which is its exclusive “owner”. Owners can transfer the ownership of a
value to other variables, e.g., via assignments, and other variables can borrow values
from their owners. Borrowing means the temporary transfer of ownership, which
is returned to the owner after the borrower ﬁnished using it. For example, Rust’s
borrow-checker makes sure that the lifetime of the owner of a value extends beyond
the lifetime of the borrower of that value. This allows the Rust compiler to perform
optimisations, e.g., that once the owner of a value disappears (e.g., by going out
of scope) it can safely free any memory in the heap that corresponds to the latter.
Borrow-checking also supports the implementation of concurrent programs free from
races on data, since memory access always happens in safe conditions, e.g., knowing
that a variable has only one owner who can modify it. Rust was also inﬂuenced by
the functional paradigm, including features like type-class-like traits (à la Haskell),
parametric polymorphism, and pattern matching. Like Go and C#, also Rust provides
an “unsafe” mode that allows the developer to write low-level code (e.g., where we
have multiple pointers that modify the same value in memory) that circumvents the
restrictions enforced by the type- and borrow-checker.

Swift (2014) is a programming language developed by Apple, with the purpose to
replace Objective-C, a Smalltalk-like object-oriented extension of C introduced in
1984 and used since to program applications for the company’s devices. Given this
objective, Swift inherited from Objective-C protocol orientation, which is a method
to implement code compositionality alternative to object-oriented inheritance (which
Swift also supports). In protocol orientation, a protocol deﬁnes a set of ﬁelds and
operations that one can attach to a structure or a class. The programmer can write
extensions of the protocol to initialise the ﬁelds and deﬁne the behaviour related
to that protocol for all structures/objects that implement it. To manage memory
in presence of references (e.g., when passing objects), Swift adopts a model of
reference counting (cf. Sect. 8.11.1). To solve the problem of memory leaks due to
uncollectable reference cycles, Swift lets the programmer mark references labelled
as strong and weak. Strong references are the ordinary ones (e.g., when assigning an
object to a variable), whose creation and deletion impact the count of a reference.
Weak references do not modify the reference count but always correspond to Optional
types. In doing so, the language achieves two results. On the one hand, it forces
the programmer to check for the presence of the value addressed by the reference,
preventing null-pointer dereferencing. On the other hand, one can break reference
cycles by using strong and weak references in parent-child structures, e.g., where the
parent has a weak reference to the child, but the child has a strong one to the parent.

Gradual Typing and TypeScript

In Sect. 16.6, we discussed how the 1990s saw the introduction of a quartet of inter-
preted, dynamically-typed languages that became and remained some of the most

546

16 Short Historical Perspective

popular programming languages of the following decades: JavaScript, PHP, Python,
and Ruby.

Besides their speciﬁc characteristics and typical application areas, an important
aspect that contributed to determining the wide adoption of these languages is the
support they give to users in rapidly putting together small programs and prototyping
ideas. Indeed, thanks to dynamic typing, developers can build the elements that
make up their programs along the way, instead of having to specify the type of
those elements beforehand. Since typing happens at runtime, programmers retain
the guarantee that, if there is an inconsistent usage of the program’s elements, the
runtime checks would catch them and avoid unexpected behaviours.

As the number of large software projects developed with dynamically-typed lan-
guages grew over time, users realised that trading rapid prototyping off static checks
was an unfavourable deal. Indeed, as discussed in Sect. 8.2.1, in static typing, we
can see a type as a contract that both the provider (the implementor of a value of that
type) and the user (the consumer of the value of that type) agreed to follow. When the
type checker analyses a program, it points out all instances where either party does
not abide by that contract. On the contrary, dynamic typing reports those instances
only when the program reaches an erroneous instruction at runtime. Developers can
check that their implementations are correct by assembling exhaustive testing cases
for the possible combination of elements of their program. However, the larger the
codebase, the more tests one needs to write to exhaustively cover all combinations.
Essentially, this activity partially defeats the point of adopting dynamically-typed lan-
guages for fast development/prototyping; we chose a dynamically-typed language
to let us quickly assemble our programs, but we ended up hampering development
due to the need for extensive testing.

Recognising the limitations of both static and dynamic typing, researchers intro-
duced a compromise between the two: gradual typing. In gradual typing, users can
modulate the amount of typing information they provide in their programs, indi-
cating what elements of their programs the interpreter/compiler can statically and
dynamically check.

Interestingly, while one can build a new language that supports gradual typing,
the technique naturally lends itself to creating gradually-typed extensions of existing
languages (either statically- or dynamically-typed).

As expected (given their popularity) all languages in our 1990s quartet have seen
either proposals that either syntactically extend them with gradual types or tools that
use the existing language constructs (e.g., as annotations or optional declarations) to
introduce types and perform static type checking.

The most famous example among gradually-typed language extensions is Type-
Script. Introduced in 2012 by Microsoft, the syntax of TypeScript is a strict superset of
JavaScript’s, with additional constructs for type annotations—JavaScript is also the
intended target compilation language of TypeScript. This means that valid JavaScript
programs are also valid TypeScript programs (which the TypeScript compiler can
statically check to a limited extent since they lack complete typing information).

16.9 Summary

547

The design principle behind TypeScript and other gradually-typed languages is to
give programmers the freedom to choose when (during the development of a software
project) and where (in the project’s codebase) they want the ﬂexibility of dynamic
typing or the guarantees of static type-checking. A developer can take an existing
JavaScript program, add to it type annotations that the TypeScript compiler would
use to type-check it, and subsequently compile the program back into executable
JavaScript—the compilation process might not produce the JavaScript program we
started with, since it can use type annotations to introduce optimisations and/or
additional runtime checks. Similarly, one can choose to add new TypeScript modules
to an existing JavaScript codebase and/or modulate which parts of the program shall
be statically checked, by including type annotations.

16.9 Summary

In this concluding chapter, we have sought to put the most important programming
languages introduced up to the present into a historical perspective. In particular,
we strived to explain the reasons for various design decisions and the success and
failures of the presented proposals.

An adequate treatment of these questions would require a dedicated book, which
would not be easy to write because even if it is not difﬁcult to locate the documentation
for different languages (even for extinct ones), determining the inﬂuences between
one proposal and another is often extremely complicated.

Concerning the possible future (sequential) languages, Chaps. 10–15 contain indi-
cations about paradigms in which research effort is currently being concentrated.
Probably the programming languages of the near future will develop in this context
by seeking to improve on the many weak points of current languages (some cues for
reﬂection in this sense are indicated in the text).

There are other contexts from which signiﬁcant progress can be expected. One,
perhaps the most important, is that of concurrent languages. In particular, as men-
tioned in Chaps. 14 and 15, technologies such as those that emerged for Service-
Oriented Programming and Cloud Computing promise important developments in
both theory and practice, with far-reaching application spin-offs. Important innova-
tions in languages can also be expected from areas such as bio-informatics and quan-
tum computing. Although Church’s thesis seems destined to withstand the stresses
coming from these new areas, there is no doubt that biological or quantum compu-
tational mechanisms open up hitherto unexplored perspectives. These are, however,
developments that will require adequate time: we will probably have to leave it to
others, perhaps to one of the young readers of this text, to account for the novelties
to come.

548

16 Short Historical Perspective

16.10 Bibliographical Notes

The bibliography for this chapter is, as can be predicted, endless. Every single pro-
gramming language has been the subject of numerous publications from manuals
to more theoretical treatments. In particular, concurrent and service-oriented pro-
gramming would deserve a separate bibliography, given the continuously growing
number of scholarly publications and educational books devoted to the subject (see
also Sects. 14.9 and 15.5). For some main languages currently in use, we note [1]
for C, [2,3] for Java, [4] for C++, [5] for ML, and [6] for Prolog.

Wishing to limit ourselves to publications about programming languages in a
historical context, an excellent source of information is the proceedings of the con-
ference on the history of programming languages organised by the American Associ-
ation for Computing Machinery (see the editions of [7–10]). Almost all the languages
mentioned in this chapter are the object of an introductory note in these proceedings,
written by the language designers themselves. Also, the Annals of the History of
Computing from the IEEE contain much interesting material. A historical account
of software of the 1950 and 1960s is contained in [11]. For a history of the notion of
types in programming languages, see [12].

There are also books that provide an overview of various languages, for example,
[13] and, for older languages, [14]. Some texts, whose purpose is similar to our own,
are [15–17]. They also contain short descriptions of the most important languages.
In addition, there are various texts which present the history of various aspects of
the automatic computer, such as [18]. It can also be interesting to consult mono-
graphs about the pioneers of the modern electronic computer because, in addition to
biographical aspects, they provide interesting points for reﬂection on the difﬁculties
encountered by those who, basically, invented a completely new discipline. A good
example in this sense is [19].

Finally, to understand the different, often contrasting, viewpoints, of the protag-
onists of this story of programming languages, it is certainly useful to consult the
original articles which they have written. The article by Dijkstra [20] and that by
Wirth [21] are two of the many that are available.

References

1. B.W. Kernighan, D.M. Ritchie, The C Programming Language (Prentice Hall, 1988)
2. T. Lindholm, F. Yellin. The Java Virtual Machine Speciﬁcation, 2nd ed. (Sun and Addison-

Wesley, 1999)

3. J. Gosling, B. Joy, G. Steele, G. Bracha, The Java Language Speciﬁcation, 3/E (Addison
Wesley, 2005). The last speciﬁcation available at the time of printing is that of Java SE 19.
docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/. Accessed 14 Feb. 2023

4. B. Stroustrup, The C++ Programming Language, 4th edn. (Addison-Wesley Professional,

Boston, 2013)

5. R. Milner, M. Tofte, R. Harper, D. MacQueen, The Deﬁnition of Standard ML—Revised (MIT

Press, 1997)

6. L. Sterling, E. Shapiro, The Art of Prolog (MIT Press, 1986)

References

549

7. L. Wexelblat ed., in Proceedings of the ﬁrst ACM SIGPLAN Conference on History of Pro-

gramming Languages (ACM Press, 1978)

8. Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), in Proceedings of the Second ACM SIGPLAN

Conference on History of Programming Languages (ACM Press, 1993)

9. B. Ryder, B. Hailpern eds., in HOPL III: Proceedings of the Third ACM SIGPLAN Confer-
ence on History of Programming Languages, New York, NY, USA (2007). Association for
Computing Machinery

10. R.P. Gabriel, G.L. Steele Jr., eds., Fourth ACM SIGPLAN History of Programming Languages

Conference (HOPL IV), vol. 4 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2020)
11. T. Haigh, P.E. Ceruzzi, A New History of Modern Computing (MIT Press, 2021)
12. S. Martini, Several types of types in programming languages, in F. Gadducci, M. Tavosanis eds.,
History and Philosophy of Computing—Third International Conference, HaPoC 2015, Pisa,
Italy, 8–11 Oct. 2015, Revised Selected Papers, volume 487 of IFIP Advances in Information
and Communication Technology, pp. 216–227 (2015)

13. E. Horowitz, Programming Languages: A Grand Tour (Computer Science Press, 1987)
14. J. Sammet, Programming Languages: History and Fundamentals (Prentice-Hall, 1969)
15. R. Sethi, Programming Languages: Concepts and Constructs (Addison-Wesley, 1996)
16. M.L. Scott. Programming Language Pragmatics (Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2000)
17. T.W. Pratt, M.V. Zelkowitz, Programming Languages: Design and Implementation, 4th ed.

(Pearson, 2000)

18. M.R. Williams, A History of Computing Technology, 2nd ed. (Wiley, 1997)
19. I.B. Cohen, Howard Aiken: Portrait of a Computer Pioneer (The MIT Press, 2000)
20. E.W. Dijkstra, Go to statement considered harmful. Commun. ACM 11(3), 147–148 (1968)
21. N. Wirth, From programming language design to computer construction. Commun. ACM 28(2),

159–164 (1985). Turing Award lecture

Index

Symbols
β-rule, 340
λ-calculus, 359
π -calculus, 542

A
A-list, 110
abstract machine, 1
abstraction

on control, 163
on data, 199, 268

Ackermann

function, 145

ACP, 535
activation record, 91

dynamic chain pointer, 102
for in-line blocks, 92
for function, 94
for procedure, 94
pointer, 96
static chain pointer, 94

Ada, 534
Aiken, H., 520
Algol, 214, 524

scope, 74

alias, 67
aliasing, 64, 67, 130
analysis

lexical, 39
semantic, 41
syntactic, 40

APL, 121
applet, 537
application, 337, 340
arithmetic

pointer, 224

array, 216

address calculation, 219
allocation, 218, 219

dope vector, 220, 221

bounds checking, 218
in C, 227
Java, 221
multidimensional, 217
shape, 219
slice, 217
stride, 219

ASCC/MARK I, 520
assembly language, 4, 521
Assignment, 129, seealso Command

augmented, 132
chained, 131
compound, 132
multiple, 132

association

creation, 71
deactivation, 71
destruction, 71
environment, 65
lifetime, 72
reactivation, 72

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer
Nature Switzerland AG 2023
M. Gabbrielli and S. Martini, Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms,
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34144-1

551

552

B
Böhm, C., 136
Babbage, C., 533
backtracking, 393
Backus, J., 524
barrier, 444
base class

fragile, 308
Bernstein, A., 527
Beta rule, 340
binding

deep, 178
environment, 65
shallow, 178
blackboard, 439
block, 66, 136

activation record, 92
and procedure, 68
in-line, 68
protected, 188

BNF, 525
Boolean, 206
Brinch Hansen, P., 449, 532
busy waiting, 442
Byron Lovelace, A., 533
bytecode, 19
Java, 537

C
C, 528

array, 216
augmented assignment, 132
call by reference, 169
contextual constraints, 37
enumeration, 209
environment, 182
function declaration, 79
parameter passing, 168
union, 213

C++, 534

call by reference, 243
class, 288
dynamic method dispatch, 303
inheritance, 295
multiple inheritance, 297
subtype, 290
template, 241
virtual member function, 292

C#, 542
call

of procedure, 96

Index

Case, see Command
cast, 236, 237

non-converting, 237

CCS, 470
Central Reference Table, 109
channel, 452
character, 207
CHIP, 536
Chomsky, N., 27
Church’s Thesis, 60
Church, A., 60
class, 286

abstract, 292
derived, 290
fragile base, 308
implementation, 305

classless, 288
clause, 376, 377

as procedure, 387
body, 376
deﬁnite, 376
head, 376
in Clp, 415
unit, 376, 415

closure, 175, 179, 181, 183, 186
CLP, see Constraint logic programs
CLP(R), 536
COBOL, 526
Coercion, 237
Colmerauer, A., 531, 536
command, 127

;, 135
case, 138
do, 142
for, 143
goto, 136
if, 137
repeat, 142
while, 142
assignment, 129
assignment in C, 131
block, 136
composite, 136
conditional, 137

syntactic ambiguity, 138

guarded, 460
iteration

bounded, 142
unbounded, 142

iterative, 141
sequence, 134

Index

structured, 149

communication

asynchronous, 440
in Java threads, 466
mechanisms of, 438
message exchange, 439
shared memory, 439
synchronous, 441

compatibility of types, 234

structural, 235
compile time, 65
compiler, 1, 39
composition

parallel, 462
computability, 57
computation, 43
computed answer, 391–393
comunication

shared memory, 439
synchronous, 456
concurrency, 433, 436

logical, 437

constraint, 410, 536
and generate, 418
deﬁnition, 414
optimization problem, 413
propagation, 411
satisfaction problem, 412

Constraint logic programming, see Constraint

logic programs
Constraint logic programs, 413, 536

computation, 417
semantics, 416
solve rule, 416
syntax, 415
transition relation, 416
transition system, 416
unfold rule, 416

constructor, 211, 229, 293

chaining, 294
type, 230

continuation, 157
contravariant, 327
COP, see Constraint optimization problem
copy rule, 173, 339
covariant, 326
CRT, see Central Reference Table
crypto-arithmetic puzzle, 418
CSP, see Constraint satisfaction problem
CSP language, 451, 470

553

Synchronous communication, 456

Curry, H., 351

D
Dahl, O.J., 526
dangling pointer, 248
Datalog, 402
deadlock, 447
deallocation, 224, 247
declaration, 66
scope, 80

deep binding, 178
delegation, 288
denotable, 204
dereference, 223, 248

l-value, 222
derivation, 30
Dijkstra, E.W., 159, 445, 470, 527, 532
dispatch, 300

multiple, 304

Display, 107
dope vector, 220
dotted pair, 119
downcast, 307
duck typing, 235
dynamic

chain, 93
selection, 285

E
Eckert, J.P., 520
EDSAC, 520
EDVAC, 520
Eich, B., 540
emulation, 9, 10
engine

analytic, 533
difference, 533

ENIAC, 520
enumeration, 210
environment, 64
and block, 66
global, 70
local, 69
non-local, 70
referencing, 66

Epilogue, 96
equality

of terms, 381

equation

naming, 451

between terms, 377

554

equivalence

by name, 232
of types, 203, 231
structural, 232

Erlang, 336, 350, 356
evaluation

applicative-order, 343
by name, 344
by need, 345
by value, 343
eager, 343
innermost, 343
lazy, 345
leftmost, 343
normal order, 344
outermost, 344
strategy, 342
exception, 187

implementation, 192
resumption after, 189
rethrowing, 192

expressible, 204
expression, 117

associativity, 120
evaluation, 120, 123

APL, 121
eager, 125
lazy, 126
short circuit, 126
tree, 123

inﬁx, 124
lambda, 185
notation

Cambridge Polish, 120
inﬁx, 118
Polish, 119
postﬁx, 120
preﬁx, 119
precedence, 120
preﬁx, 122
representation as tree, 120
semantics, 47
syntax, 118
expressiveness

of bounded iteration, 145

F
F#, 542
fairness, 444
Fibonacci

function, 151

Index

sequence, 88
Fibonacci, L., 88
ﬁeld

of record, 211
shadowing, 291

ﬁlter, 349
ﬁrmware, 10
First-order Logic, 373
ﬁxed point

operator, 363, 364
representation, 208

ﬂoat, 207
ﬂoating point, 207
fold, 349
For, see Command
FORTRAN, 522, 524
fragile

base class, 308
fragmentation, 100
external, 100
internal, 100

Free list, 100
funarg problem, 195
function, 164

activation record, 94
as parameter, 177
as result, 182
call, 96
computable, 58
covariant, 327
higher-order, 176
mutually recursive, 79
partial, 12
virtual in C++, 292
Futumara, projection, 24

G
Gödel, K., 58
garbage collection, 251

copying, 257
mark and compact, 256
mark and sweep, 254
pointer reversal, 255
reference counting, 252
stop and copy, 257

Gauss-Jordan, 411
generate and test, 418
generator, 185
generic, 318, 320

implementation, 325

GHC, 535

555

Index

Go, 544
goal, 376, 415

evaluation, 389

Gosling, J., 536
Goto, see Command
grammar

ambiguous, 35
context-free, 28
contextual, 37
regular, 40

Griesemer, R., 544
guard, 460
guarded command, 460

H
Halting Problem, 53
handler, 188
Hanoi

towers of, 396

hardware

implementation, 8
Haskell, 204, 336, 540
heap, 97, 98
block

ﬁxed length, 98
variable length, 99

buddy system, 102
compaction, 101
Fibonacci, 102
fragmentation, 100
external, 100
internal, 100
management, 98
multiple free list, 101
single free list, 100
Herbrand Universe, 381
Herbrand, J., 369
hiding

of information, 267, 270

hierarchy of abstract machines, 20
higher order, 176, 366
Hoare, C.A.R., 449, 470, 525, 532
Hoare, G., 544
Hopper, G., 526
HTML, 536

I
Ichbiah, J., 534
If, see Command
implementation, 8, 26, 267

compiled, 12

of Pascal, 19
purely compiled, 14
purely interpreted, 12, 13
real case, 16

index

type of, 216

Inductive deﬁnitions, 151
inference

type, 203

information hiding, 267, 270
inheritance, 295, 297

implementation, 295
interface, 295
multiple, 312
with replication, 315
with sharing, 316

integer, 207
interface, 269
interleaving, 462
interpreter, 1, 2, 7, 13
interrupt, 434
interval, 205, 210
iterable, 147
iteration

bounded, 142
unbounded, 142

J
Jacopini, G., 136
Jaffar, J., 536
Java, 201

Runnable, 464
Socket, 468
notifyAll, 468
notify, 468
run, 463
start, 463
synchronized, 466
wait, 468
array, 325
augmented assignment, 132
bytecode, 19, 537
contextual constraints, 37
evaluation order, 125, 130
exception, 187
for-each, 147
generic, 320
inheritance, 296
interface, 292
JVM, 19
parameter passing, 171

556

Index

reference model for variables, 129
RMI, 469
subtype, 289
thread, 463
Virtual Machine, 19, 309, 310, 537
wildcard, 324, 326
JavaScript, 288, 538
Jensen

device, 177

Jolie, 486
JVM, 19, 537

K
Kay, A., 527, 530
Kleene, S., 58
Kowalski, R., 531

L
l-value, 130, 211
lambda, 185
lambda calculus, 359
Landin, P., 159, 356
Language

assembly, 4, 521
declarative, 134
domain-speciﬁc, 543
formal, 28
functional, 347
high-level, 4
higher order, 176
imperative, 134
logic, 375
low-level, 4
scripting, 538
Lerdorf, R., 539
lifetime, 72, 166, 221
Linda, 439, 535
Liskov substitution principle, 236
Liskov, B., 236
LISP, 109, 119, 525

garbage collection, 251
side effects, 353

list

Prolog, 370
Python, 226

loan

CLP example, 420

lock, 442
locks and keys, 250
logic program, 375

computational model, 386

declarative interpretation, 387
failure, 390
procedural interpretation, 387
success, 390

Lukasiewicz, L., 119

M
machine

abstract, 1, 20
hardware, 3
implementation, 9, 17
intermediate, 16

Java, 19
Pascal, 19
interpreter, 1, 2
memory, 5, 7
SECD, 356
von Neumann, 520

map, 349
MARK I, 520
Matsumoto, Y., 539
Mauchly, J., 520
McCarthy, J., 525
memory, 87
heap, 97
semantic domain, 133
stack, 90
static, 89

Menabrea, L., 533
Messaging Patterns, 487

Enterprise Service Bus, 489
request-response, 488

method

abstract, 292
binary, 329
dynamic lookup, 300
overriding, 291
redeﬁnition, 290
resolution order, 299, 300
static, 288

Milner, R., 470, 532, 541, 542
MiniZinc, 422

constraints, 423
COP example, 425
CSP example, 422
parameters, 423
variables, 423

mix-in, 296
ML, 336, 337, 351–353, 530

recursive type, 228
reference cell, 353

Index

Modula, 532
module, 274, 458
monitor, 448, 449
signal, 450
wait, 450
condition variable, 449, 450

monomorphic, 238
MRO, 299, 300
multimethod, 304
mutual exclusion, 441

lock, 442

N
name, 63

clash, 297
conﬂict, 297
mangling, 289

naming mechanisms, 451
Naur, P., 524
negation, 400

as failure, 401

non-determinism, 392
Nygaard, K., 526

O
object, 284

allocation, 288
creation, 72
deallocation, 288
denotable, 63, 65
access, 72
creation, 72
destruction, 72
lifetime, 72
modiﬁcation, 72
implementation, 306

OCaml, 541
Occam, 452, 532, 535
Odersky, M., 543
operator

associativity, 121
precedence, 118

option type, 215
order

column-major, 218
row-major, 218
overloading, 239
overriding, 291

contravariant, 327

557

P
P-code, 529
package, 274
paradigm

concurrent, 433
constraint, 409
functional, 335
logic, 369
object-oriented, 279
service-oriented, 473
parallel composition, 462
parallelism

maximal, 462
parameter, 165, 167

actual, 165
call by assignment, 171
call by constant, 170
call by name, 173
call by need, 174
call by object reference, 171
call by reference, 168

in C, 169

call by result, 171
call by value, 168
call by value-result, 172
formal, 165
passing, 167
PARLOG, 535
parser, 40
Pascal, 529

contextual constraints, 37
equivalence by name, 232
variant record, 213
pattern matching, 348
Peano, G., 151
PHP, 538
pi-calculus, 542
Pike, R., 544
pointer, 222

arithmetic, 224
dangling, 248
dereference, 248
dynamic chain, 93, 102
reversal, 255
static chain, 94
polymorphism, 318

explicit, 241
implicit, 241
inclusion, 239
parametric, 239
subtype, 239

558

universal, 239
universal parametric, 240
universal subtype, 242

predicate, 371, 374
calculus, 373
procedure call

calling sequence, 96, 97
epilogue, 96

process, 433

heavyweight, 433
lightweight, 433

Production, 29
program transformation, 22
Programming

concurrent, 433
constraint, 409
distributed, 437
functional, 347
logic, 369

constraint, 413
declarative interpretation, 387
procedural interpretation, 387

multithreaded, 437
sequential, 433
service-oriented, 473

Prolog, 397

arithmetic, 398
backtracking, 393
clause selection, 391
computational model, 386
control, 392
cut, 399
disjunction, 400
failure, 394
history, 531
negation, 400
non-determinism, 393
occurs check, 384
selection rule, 389

Prolog II, 536
Prolog III, 536
Prologue, 96
prototype-based, 288
Python, 538

int type, 207
assignment

augmented, 132
chained, 131
expression, 131
multiple, 132

Boolean operator evaluation, 127

Index

bytecode, 19
class constructor, 294
class hierarchy representation, 305
contextual constraints, 37
duck typing, 235
dynamic access attributes, 285
EAFP, 191
evaluation order, 125, 130
exception, 187
for, 148
garbage collection, 254
generator, 185
indentation, 39, 68, 136
inheritance, 297
lambda expression, 186
list, 226
MRO, 300
multiple inheritance, 297
name

deﬁnition, 79
mangling, 289

parameter passing, 171
private attribute, 289
reference model for variables, 129
scope, 74
suite, 68
tuple, 226
visibility, 69
visibility rule, 193

Q
query, 376, 415

R
r-value, 130
Rails, 539
range, 210
real, 207
receive, 439
record, 211

variant, 213

recursion, 88, 89, 151

mutual, 79
tail, 88, 153

redex, 340
reduce, 349
reduction, 338
reference counter, 252
refutation

SLD, 391

rendez-vous, 457

Index

559

representation independence, 273
resolution, 369, 376
SLD, 376, 391
rewriting, 336, 338
Ritchie, D., 528
Robinson, A., 369, 531
root set, 254
Roussel, A, 531
RPC, 457
Ruby, 538

array, 226
on Rails, 539

rule

beta, 340
copy, 173, 339
visibility, 63, 193

runtime, 65
Rust, 544

S
S-expressions, 119
Scala, 173, 350, 543

lambda expression, 186
reference model for variables, 129
structural compatibility, 235

Scheme, 204, 248, 540
scope, 73

A-list, 110
CRT, 109
declaration, 74
display, 107
dynamic, 76
dynamic chain, 93
implementation, 102
Java, 74
problems, 78
rules, 73
static, 74
Static Chain, 102
static chain, 94

SECD, 356
selection rule, 389
Self, 288
semantics, 44, 46
denotational, 44
operational, 44
static, 38
semaphore, 445

P, 446
V, 446
send, 439

sequence, 226
serialisation, 481
service, 476

choreography, 479
orchestration, 479

Service-Oriented Architectures, 510
Shadowing, 291
shallow binding, 178
side effect, 125
Simula, 526
class, 286

slice, 217
Smalltalk, 529

class hierarchy representation, 305

SNOBOL, 124
solution

of constraints, 413

spaghetti code, 149
speciﬁcation

of ADT, 272
speed-up, 436
SR, 535
stack, 91
standard model, 56
static

in C, 166

Static Chain, see Scope
strategy

evaluation, 342

stream, 352
strongly typed, 203
Stroustrup, B., 534
stub, 458
subclass, 290
substitution, 378

application, 379
composition, 379
ground, 379
most general, 381
renaming, 380
restriction, 380
subtype, 236, 289
behavioural, 236

Swift, 545
synchronisation

busy waiting, 442
condition, 441
mechanisms, 440
mutual exclusion, 441, 442
scheduler-based, 445

Synchronising Resources, 535

560

syntactic sugar, 119, 159
syntax, 25, 27
abstract, 40
system stack, 91

T
tail recursion, 88, 153
Template, 243
term, 374

ground, 375

theorem

of Böhm and Jacopini, 136

Thompson, K., 528, 544
thread, 433
thunk, 181, 186
tombstone, 248
towers of Hanoi, 396
trait, 543
transition, 44, 46
transition system

for constraint logic programs, 416
Traveling Salesperson Problem, 425
tree, 31

derivation, 31
syntax, 123
tuple space, 439
Turing

completeness, 58
equivalent, 58
machine, 17, 58
Turing, A.M., 57
type, 199

base of interval, 210
checker, 201, 233
checking, 204, 245
compatibility, 234
composite, 211
conversion, 234
discrete, 211
equivalence, 231
explicit conversion, 238
index, 216
inference, 245
monomorphic, 238
of functions, 230
option, 215
recursive, 228
recursive in ML, 230
safety, 199, 203, 205, 218, 226
scalar, 205
simple, 205

Index

system, 199
void, 208

typing

duck, 235
dynamic, 204
static, 204

U
undecidability, 55

of halting problem, 55
of static type checking, 205

uniﬁcation, 377

algorithm, 383
Martelli and Montanari algorithm, 383
theory, 377

uniﬁer

most general, 381

union, 213

tagged, 215

unit, 209

V
value

denotable, 133, 134, 204
expressible, 133, 134, 204
functional, 342
storable, 133, 134, 204

van Rossum, G., 539
variable, 128, 335, 377

bound, 165
capture, 174
class, 288
external, 182
global

static allocation, 89
in activation record, 91
in functional languages, 335
in imperative languages, 128
in logic programming, 377
instance, 286
logic, 377
modiﬁable, 128
reference model, 129
shadowing, 291
static, 166
variance, 380
vector

dope, 220
visibility, 69

Index

rule, 63, 193

void, 209
von Neumann, J., 336, 520
vtable, 307

561

W
Warren Abstract Machine, 404
Wilkes, M., 520
Wirth, N., 525, 529, 532
