Abstract Machines

1

Abstraction mechanisms play a crucial role in computing because they allow us
to deal with the complexity inherent in most computational systems by isolating
the aspects that are important in a particular context. In the ﬁeld of programming
languages, these mechanisms are fundamental, both from a theoretical point of view
(many important concepts can be adequately formalised using abstractions) and
in a practical sense, because because programming languages today use common
abstraction-creating constructs.

One of the most general concepts is the abstract machine. In this chapter, we
will see how this concept is closely related to programming languages. Abstract
machines allow describing what an implementation of a programming language is,
without requiring us to go into the speciﬁc details of any particular implementation.
We will describe in general terms what is the interpreter and the compiler for a
language. Finally, will see how abstract machines can be structured in hierarchies
that describe and implement complex software systems.

1.1 The Concepts of Abstract Machine and the Interpreter

In the context of this book, the term “machine” refers clearly to a computing machine.
An electronic, digital computer is a physical machine that executes suitably formal-
ized algorithms so that the machine can “understand” them. Intuitively, an abstract
machine is an abstraction of the concept of a physical computer.

For actual execution, algorithms must be appropriately formalised using the con-
structs provided by a programming language. In other words, the algorithms we want
to execute must be represented using the instructions of a programming language,
L . This language will be formally deﬁned in terms of a speciﬁc syntax and a precise
semantics—see Chap. 2. For the time being, the nature of L is of no concern to us.

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
M. Gabbrielli and S. Martini, Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms,
Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34144-1_1

1

2

1 Abstract Machines

Data

Memory

Program

Interpreter

Sequence
control

Data
control

Operations

Memory
management

Fig. 1.1 The structure of an abstract machine

Here, it is sufﬁcient to know that the syntax of L allows us to use a given ﬁnite set of
constructs, called instructions, to construct programs. A program in L (or program
written in L ) is a ﬁnite, ordered list of instructions of L . With these preliminary
remarks, we now present a deﬁnition that is central to this chapter.

Deﬁnition 1.1 (Abstract Machine) Assume that we are given a programming lan-
guage, L . An abstract machine for L , denoted by ML , is any set of data structures
and algorithms which can perform the storage and execution of programs written
in L .

When we choose not to specify the language, L , we will simply talk of the
abstract machine, M , omitting the subscript. We will soon see some example abstract
machines and how they can actually be implemented. For the time being, let us
consider the structure of an abstract machine. As depicted in Fig. 1.1, a generic
abstract machine ML is composed of a store and an interpreter. The store serves
to save data and programs while the interpreter is the component that executes the
instructions of the programs.

1.1.1 The Interpreter

Any interpreter is speciﬁc to its language. However, there are types of operation and
an “execution method” common to all interpreters. The type of operation executed
by the interpreter and associated data structures, fall into the following categories:

1.1 The Concepts of Abstract Machine and the Interpreter

3

1. Operations for processing primitive data;
2. Operations and data structures for controlling the sequence of execution of oper-

ations;

3. Operations and data structures for controlling data transfers;
4. Operations and data structures for memory management.

We consider these four points in detail.
1. The need for operations processing primitive data is clear. The purpose of
an (abstract) machine is the execution of algorithms, so it must have operations
for manipulating primitive data items, that is data that have a direct representation
in the machine. For example, for physical abstract machines, as well as for the
abstract machines for most programming languages, numbers (integer or real) are
almost always primitive data. The machine directly implements the various opera-
tions required to perform arithmetic (addition, multiplication, etc.). These arithmetic
operations are therefore primitive operations as far as the abstract machine is con-
cerned.1

2. Operations and structures for “sequence control” allow controlling the execution
ﬂow of instructions in a program. The normal sequential execution of a program might
have to be modiﬁed when some conditions are satisﬁed. The interpreter, therefore,
makes use of data structures (for example to hold the address of the next instruction
to execute) which are manipulated by speciﬁc operations that are different from those
used for data manipulation (for example, operations to update the address of the next
instruction to execute).

3. Operations that control data transfers are included in order to control how
operands and data are to be transferred from memory to the interpreter and vice
versa. These operations deal with the different store addressing modes and the order
in which operands are to be retrieved from the store. In some cases, auxiliary data
structures might be necessary to handle data transfers. For example, some types of
machine use stacks (implemented either in hardware or software) for this purpose.
4. Finally, there is memory management. This concerns the operations used to
allocate data and programs in memory. In the case of abstract machines that are sim-
ilar to hardware machines, storage management is relatively simple. In the limit case
of a physical register-based machine that is not multi-programmed, a program and
its associated data could be allocated in a zone of memory at the start of execution
and remain there until the end, without much real need for memory management.
Abstract machines for common programming languages, instead, use more sophis-
ticated memory management techniques. In fact, some constructs in these languages
cause memory to be allocated or deallocated. Correct implementation of these oper-
ations requires suitable data structures (for example, stacks) and dynamic operations
(which are, therefore, executed at runtime).

1 There exist programming languages, for example, some declarative languages, in which numeric
values and their associated operations are not primitive.

4

1 Abstract Machines

“Low-level” and “High-level” Languages

In the ﬁeld of programming languages, the terms “low level” and “high level” are often used to
refer to languages “closer the physical machine” and “closer to the human user”, respectively.

Let us therefore call low-level, those languages whose abstract machines are very close to, or
coincide with, the physical machine. Starting at the end of the 1940s, these languages were used
to program the ﬁrst computers, but, they turned out to be extremely awkward to use. Because the
instructions in these languages had to take into account the physical characteristics of the machine,
matters that were completely irrelevant to the algorithm had to be considered while writing programs,
or in coding algorithms. It must be remembered that often when we speak generically about “machine
language”, we mean the language (a low-level one) of a physical machine. A particular low-level
language for a physical machine is its assembly language, which is a symbolic version of the
language of a hardware machine (that is, which uses symbols such as ADD, MUL, etc., instead of
their associated hardware binary codes). Programs in assembly language are translated into machine
code using a program called an assembler.

So-called high-level programming languages are, on the other hand, those which support
appropriate abstraction mechanisms to ensure that they are independent of the physical character-
istics of the underlying physical computer. High-level languages are therefore suited to expressing
algorithms in ways that are relatively easy for the human user to understand. Clearly, even the
constructs of a high-level language must, at the end, correspond to some sequence of instructions
of the physical machine, because it must be possible to execute those programs.

We will return to these issues, from a historical perspective, in Chap. 16.

The interpreter’s execution cycle, which is substantially the same for all inter-
preters, is shown in Fig. 1.2. It is organised in terms of the following steps. First, it

Start

Fetch
next instruction

Decode

Fetch
operands

Choose

Execute OP1

Execute OP2

Execute OPn

Execute HALT

Store the
risult

Stop

Fig. 1.2 The execution cycle of a generic interpreter

1.1 The Concepts of Abstract Machine and the Interpreter

5

fetches the next instruction to execute from memory. The instruction is then decoded
to determine the operation to be performed as well as its operands. As many operands
as required by the instruction are fetched from memory using the method described
above. After this, the instruction, which must be one of the machine’s primitives,
is executed. Once execution of the operation has completed, any results are stored.
Then, unless the instruction just executed is a halt instruction, execution passes to
the next instruction in sequence and the cycle repeats.

Now that we have seen the interpreter, we can deﬁne the language it interprets as

follows:

Deﬁnition 1.2 (Machine language) Given an abstract machine, ML , the language
L “understood” by ML ’s interpreter is called the machine language of ML .

Programs written in the machine language of ML will be stored in the abstract
machine’s storage structures so that they cannot be confused with other primitive data
on which the interpreter operates (from the interpreter’s viewpoint, programs are also
a kind of data). Given that the internal representation of the programs executed by the
machine ML is usually different from its external representation, then we should
strictly talk about two different languages. In any case, in order not to complicate
notation, for the time being we will not consider such differences and therefore we
will speak of just one machine language, L , for machine ML .

1.1.2 An Example of an Abstract Machine: The Hardware Machine

It should be clear that the concept of abstract machine can be used to describe a
variety of different systems, ranging from physical machines right up to the World
Wide Web.

As a ﬁrst example of an abstract machine, let us consider the concrete case of a
conventional physical machine such as that in Fig. 1.3, physically implemented using
logic gates and electronic components. Let us call such a machine M HL H and let
L H be its machine language. We may describe its components as follows.

Memory

The storage component of a physical computer is composed of various levels of
memory. Secondary memory implemented using optical or magnetic components;
primary memory, organised as a linear sequence of cells, or words, of ﬁxed size
(usually a multiple of 8 bits, for example, 32 or 64 bits); cache and the registers
which are internal to the Central Processing Unit (CPU).

Physical memory, whether primary, cache, or register ﬁle, permits the storage of

data and programs. As stated, this is done using the binary alphabet.

Data is divided into a few primitive “types”: usually, we have integer numbers,
so-called “real” numbers (in reality, a subset of the rationals), characters, and ﬁxed-
length sequences of bits. Depending upon the type of data, different physical repre-
sentations, which use one or more memory words for each element of the type are

6

1 Abstract Machines

PC

UC

R1

IR

. . .

RN

ALU

MAR

MDR

Main memory

Fig. 1.3 The structure of a conventional computer

used. For example, the integers can be represented by 1 s or 2 s complement num-
bers contained in a single word, while reals have to be represented as ﬂoating point
numbers using one or two words depending on whether they are single or double
precision. Alphanumeric characters are also implemented as sequences of binary
numbers encoded in an appropriate representational code (for example, the ASCII
or UNI CODE formats).

We will not here go into the details of these representations since they will be
examined in more detail in Chap. 8. We must emphasise the fact that although all
data is represented by sequences of bits, at the hardware level we can distinguish
different categories, or more properly types, of primitive data that can be manipulated
directly by the operations provided by the hardware. For this reason, these types are
called predeﬁned types.

The Language of the Physical Machine
The language, L H which the physical machine executes is composed of relatively
simple instructions. A typical instruction with two operands, for example, requires
one word of memory and has the format:

O p C o d e O p e r a n d 1 O p e r a n d 2

where OpCode is a unique code that identiﬁes one of the primitive operations deﬁned
by the machine’s hardware, while Operand1 and Operand2 are values that allow
the operands to be located by referring to the storage structures of the machine and
their addressing modes. For example,

ADD R5 , R0

might indicate the sum of the contents of registers R0 and R5, with the result being
stored in R5, while

ADD ( R5 ) , ( R0 )

1.1 The Concepts of Abstract Machine and the Interpreter

7

might mean that the sum of the contents of the memory cells whose addresses are
contained in R0 and R5 is computed and the result stored in the cell whose address
is in R5. In these examples, for reasons of clarity, we are using symbolic codes
such as ADD, R0, (R0). In the language under consideration, on the other hand, we
have binary numeric values (addresses are expressed in “absolute” mode). From the
viewpoint of internal representation, instructions are nothing more than data stored
in a particular format.

Like the instructions and data structures used in executing programs, the set of pos-
sible instructions (with their associated operations and addressing modes) depends
on the particular physical machine. It is possible to discern classes of machine with
similar characteristics. For example, we can distinguish between conventional CISC
(Complex Instruction Set Computer) processors which have many machine instruc-
tions (some of which are quite complex) and RISC (Reduced Instruction Set Comput-
ers) architectures in which there tend to be fewer instructions which are, in particular,
simple enough to be executed in a few (possibly one) clock cycle and in pipelined
fashion.

Interpreter

With the general structure of an abstract machine as a model, it is possible to identify
the following components of a physical (hardware) machine:

1. The operations for processing primitive data are the usual arithmetic and logi-
cal operations. They are implemented by the ALU (Arithmetic and Logic Unit).
Arithmetic operations on integers, and ﬂoating-point numbers, booleans are pro-
vided, as are shifts, tests, etc.

2. For sequence control, the main data structure is the Program Counter (PC) register,
which contains the address of the next instruction to execute. Sequence-control
operations speciﬁcally use this register and typically include the increment oper-
ation (which handles the normal ﬂow of control) and operations that modify the
value stored in the PC register (jumps).

3. To handle data transfer, the CPU registers interfacing with the main memory are
used. They are: the data address register (the MAR or Memory Address Register)
and the data register (MDR or Memory Data Register). There are, in addition,
operations that modify the contents of these registers and that implement various
addressing modes (direct, indirect, etc.). Finally, there are operations that access
and modify the CPU’s internal registers.

4. Memory processing depends on the speciﬁc architecture. In the simplest case of
a register machine that is not multi-programmed, memory management is rudi-
mentary. The program is loaded and immediately starts executing; it remains in
memory until it terminates. To increase computation speed, all modern architec-
tures use more sophisticated memory management techniques. In the ﬁrst place,
there are several levels of memory between registers and main memory (i.e., cache
memory), whose management needs special data structures and algorithms. Sec-
ond, some form of multi-programming is almost always implemented (the exe-

8

1 Abstract Machines

cution of a program can be suspended to give the CPU to other programs, so as
to optimise the management of resources). As a general rule, these techniques
(which are used by operating systems) usually require specialised hardware sup-
port to manage the presence of more than one program in memory at any time
(for example, dynamic address relocation).
All the techniques so far described need speciﬁc memory-management data struc-
tures and operations to be provided by the hardware. In addition, there are other
types of machine that correspond to less conventional architectures. In the case
of a machine which uses a (hardware) stack instead of registers, there is the stack
data structure together with the push and pop operations.

The interpreter for the hardware machine is implemented as a set of physical
devices which comprise the Control Unit and which support execution of the so-
called fetch-decode-execute cycle, using the sequence control operations. This cycle
is analogous to that in the generic interpreter such as the one depicted in Fig. 1.2. It
consists of the following phases.

In the fetch phase, the next instruction to be executed is retrieved from memory.
This is the instruction whose address is held in the PC register (the PC register is
automatically incremented after the instruction has been fetched). The instruction,
which is formed of an operation code and perhaps some operands, is then stored in
a special register, called the instruction register.

In the decode phase, the instruction stored in the instruction register is decoded
using special logic circuits. This allows the correct interpretation of both the instruc-
tion’s operation code and the addressing modes of its operands. The operands are
then retrieved by data transfer operations using the address modes speciﬁed in the
instruction.

Finally, in the execute phase, the primitive hardware operation is actually exe-
cuted, for example using the circuits of the ALU if the operation is an arithmetic or
logical one. If there is a result, it is stored in the way speciﬁed by the addressing
mode and the operation code currently held in the instruction register. Storage is
performed by means of data-transfer operations. At this point, the instruction’s exe-
cution is complete and is followed by the next phase, in which the next instruction is
fetched and the cycle continues (provided the instruction just executed is not a stop
instruction).

Note that at any given moment the hardware machine distinguishes data from
instructions. At the physical level, there is no distinction between them, given that
they are both represented as bit sequences. The distinction is contextual and derives
from the state of the CPU. In the fetch state, every word fetched from memory is
considered an instruction, while in the execute phase, it is considered to be data.
An accurate description of the operation of the physical machine would require the
introduction of other states in addition to fetch, decode and execute. Our description
only aims to show how the general concept of an interpreter is instantiated by a
physical machine.

1.2 Implementation of a Language

9

1.2 Implementation of a Language

An abstract machine, ML , is by deﬁnition a device which allows the execution of
programs written in L . An abstract machine therefore corresponds uniquely to a
language, its machine language. Conversely, given a programming language, L ,
there are several (an inﬁnite number of) abstract machines that have L as their
machine language. These machines differ from each other in the way in which the
interpreter is implemented and in the data structures that they use. They all agree,
though, on the language they interpret—L .

To implement a programming language L means realising an abstract machine
which has L as its machine language. Before seeing which implementation tech-
niques are used for current programming languages, we ﬁrst discuss the various
theoretical possibilities.

1.2.1 Implementation of an Abstract Machine

Any actual implementation of an abstract machine, ML will sooner or later use
some kind of physical device (mechanical, electronic, biological, etc.) to execute the
instructions of L . The use of such a device, nevertheless, can be explicit or implicit.
We may give a “physical” implementation (in hardware) of ML ’s constructs. But
we may also realise implementations (in software or ﬁrmware) at levels intermediate
between ML and an underlying physical device. We can therefore reduce the various
options for implementing an abstract machine to the following three cases and to
combinations of them:

• implementation in hardware;
• simulation using software;
• simulation (emulation) using ﬁrmware.

Implementation in Hardware
The direct implementation of ML in hardware is always possible in principle and
is conceptually fairly simple. It is, in fact, a matter of using physical devices such as
memory, arithmetic and logic circuits, buses, etc., to implement a physical machine
whose machine language coincides with L . To do this, it is sufﬁcient to implement in
the hardware the data structures and algorithms constituting the abstract machine.2
The implementation of a machine ML in hardware has the advantage that the
execution of programs in L will be fast because they will be directly executed by the
hardware. This advantage, nevertheless, is compensated for by various disadvantages
which predominate when L is a generic high-level language. Indeed, the constructs
of a high-level language, L , are relatively complicated and far from the elementary

2 Chapter 3 will tackle the question of why this can always be done for programming languages.

10

1 Abstract Machines

Microprogramming

Microprogramming techniques were introduced in the 1960s with the aim of providing a whole
range of different computers, ranging from the slowest and most economical to those with the
greatest speed and price, with the same instruction set and, therefore, the same assembly language
(the IBM 360 was one of the most famous computers on which microprogramming was used).
The machine language of microprogrammed machines is at an extremely low level and consists
of microinstructions which specify simple operations for the transfer of data between registers, to
and from main memory, and the activation of the logic gates that implement arithmetic operations.
Each instruction in the language which is to be implemented (that is, in the machine language
that the user of the machine sees) is simulated using a speciﬁc set of microinstructions. These
microinstructions, which encode the operation, together with a particular set of microinstructions
implementing the interpretation cycle, constitute a microprogram which is stored in special read-
only memory (which requires special equipment to write). This microprogram implements the
interpreter for the (assembly) language common to different computers, each of which has different
hardware. The most sophisticated (and costly) physical machines are built using more powerful
hardware hence they can implement an instruction by using fewer simulation steps than the less
costly models, so they run at a greater speed.

Some terminology needs to be introduced: the term used for simulation using micro-

programming, is emulation; the level at which microprogramming occurs is called ﬁrmware.

Let us, ﬁnally, observe that a microprogrammable machine constitutes a single, simple exam-
ple of a hierarchy composed of two abstract machines. At the higher level, the assembly machine is
constructed on top of what we have called the microprogrammed machine. The assembly language
interpreter is implemented in the language of the lower level (as microinstructions), which is, in its
turn, interpreted directly by the microprogrammed physical machine. We will discuss this situation
in more depth in Sect. 1.3.

functions provided at the level of the electronic circuit. An implementation of ML
requires, therefore, a more complicated design for the physical machine that we want
to implement. Moreover, in practice, such a machine, once implemented, would be
almost impossible to modify. It would not be possible to implement on it any future
modiﬁcations to L without incurring prohibitive costs. For these reasons, in prac-
tice, only low-level languages are implemented with a hardware abstract machine,
since their constructs are close to the operations that can be naturally deﬁned using
just physical devices. It is possible, though, to implement “dedicated” languages
developed for special applications directly in hardware where enormous execution
speeds are necessary. This is the case, for example, for some special languages used
in real-time systems.

There are many cases, however, in which the structure of a high-level language’s
abstract machine has inﬂuenced the implementation of a hardware architecture, not
in the sense of a direct implementation of the abstract machine in hardware, but
in the choice of primitive operations and data structures which permit simpler and
more efﬁcient implementation of the high-level language’s interpreter. A historical
example is the architecture of the Burroughs B5500, a computer from the 1960s
which was inﬂuenced by the structure of the Algol language.

1.2 Implementation of a Language

11

Simulation Using Software

The second possibility for implementing an abstract machine consists of realizing the
data structures and algorithms required by ML using programs written in another
language, L (cid:2), which, we can assume, has already been implemented. Using the
machine for L (cid:2), that is M (cid:2)
L (cid:2), we can implement the machine ML using appropri-
ate programs written in L (cid:2) which interpret the constructs of L by simulating the
functionality of ML .

In this case, we will have the greatest ﬂexibility because we can easily change the
programs implementing the constructs of ML . We will nevertheless experience a
performance that is lower than in the previous case because the implementation of
ML uses another abstract machine M (cid:2)
L (cid:2) , which, in its turn, must be implemented
in hardware, software or ﬁrmware, adding an extra level of interpretation.

Emulation Using Firmware

Finally, the third possibility is intermediate between hardware and software imple-
mentation. It consists of simulation (in this case, it is also called emulation) of the
data structures and algorithms for ML in microcode (which we brieﬂy introduced
in the box on Microprogramming).

Conceptually, this solution is similar to simulation in software. In both cases, ML
is simulated using appropriate programs that are executed by a physical machine.
Nevertheless, in the case of ﬁrmware emulation, these programs are microprograms
instead of programs in a high-level language.

As we saw in the box, microprograms use a special, very low-level language
(with extremely simple primitive operations) which are stored in a special read-only
memory instead of in main memory, so they can be executed by the physical machine
at high speed. For this reason, this implementation of an abstract machine allows
us to obtain an execution speed that is higher than that obtainable from software
simulation, even if it is not as fast as the equivalent hardware solution. On the other
hand, the ﬂexibility of this solution is lower than that of software simulation, since,
while it is easy to modify a program written in a high-level language, modiﬁcation
of microcode is relatively complicated.

Clearly, for this solution to be possible, the physical machine on which it is used

must be microprogrammable.

Summarising, the implementation of ML in hardware affords the greatest speed
but no ﬂexibility. Implementation in software affords the highest ﬂexibility and least
speed, while the one using ﬁrmware is intermediate between the two.

1.2.2 Implementation: The Ideal Case

Let us consider a generic language, L , which we want to implement, or rather, for
which an abstract machine, ML is required. Let us exclude, for the reasons just
given, direct implementation in hardware of ML , and assume, instead, that we have
available an abstract machine, M oL o, which we will call the host machine, which
is already implemented (we do not care how) and which therefore allows us to use
its machine language L o.

12

Partial Functions

1 Abstract Machines

A function f : A → B is a correspondence between elements of A and elements of B such that,
for every element a of A, there exists one and only one element of B, which is denoted by f (a).

A partial function, f : A → B, is also a correspondence between the two sets A and B, but
can be undeﬁned for some elements of A. More formally: it is a relation between A and B such that,
for every a ∈ A, if there exists a corresponding element b ∈ B, it is unique and is written f (a). The
notion of partial function, for us, is important because programs naturally deﬁne partial functions.
For example, the following program (written in a language with obvious syntax and semantics and
whose core will be deﬁned in Fig. 2.11):

read(x);
if (x == 1) then print(x);

else while (true) do skip

computes the partial function:

f (n) =

(cid:2)
1
undeﬁned otherwise

if n = 1

The implementation of L on the host machine M oL o takes place using a “trans-
lation” from L to L o. We can distinguish two conceptually different modes of
implementation, depending on whether this translation is “implicit” (implemented
by the simulation of ML ’s constructs by programs written in L o) or “explicit”,
that is providing for any program in L its corresponding program in L o. We will
consider these two ways in their ideal forms:

1. purely interpreted implementation, and
2. purely compiled implementation.

Notation

Below, as we did so far, we use the subscript L to indicate that a particular con-
struct (machine, interpreter, program, etc.) refers to language L . We will use the
superscript L to indicate that a program is written in language L . We will use
Pr ogL to denote the set of all possible programs that can be written in language
L , while D denotes the set of input and output data (and, for simplicity of treatment,
we make no distinction between the two).

A program written in L can be seen as a partial function (see the box):

such that

P L : D → D

P L (Input) = Output

1.2 Implementation of a Language

13

Program in L

Interpreter for L
written in LO

Output data

Input data

Execution on M O

M O

Fig. 1.4 Purely interpreted implementation

if the execution of PL on input data Input terminates and produces Output as its
result. The function is not deﬁned if the execution of PL on its input data, Input,
does not terminate.3

Purely Interpreted Implementation
In a purely interpreted implementation (shown in Fig. 1.4), the interpreter for ML
is implemented using a set of instructions in L o. That is, a program is implemented
in L o which interprets all of L ’s instructions. This is the interpreter of L (written
in L o), and we will write I L o

Once such interpreter is implemented, executing a program PL (written in lan-
guage L ) on speciﬁed input data D ∈ D, we need only to execute the program
I L o
L on machine M oL o, with P L and D as input data. More precisely, we can
give the following deﬁnition.

L for it.

Deﬁnition 1.3 (Interpreter) An interpreter for language L , written in language L o,
is a program which implements a partial function:
I L o

L (P L , Input) = P L (Input) (1.1)

L × D) → D such that I L o

L : (Pr og

The fact that a program can be considered as input datum for another program
should not be surprising, given that a program is only a set of instructions which,
in the ﬁnal analysis, are represented by a certain set of symbols (and therefore by
character strings, or bit sequences).

In the purely interpreted implementation of L , therefore, programs in L are not
explicitly translated. There is only a “decoding” procedure. In order to execute an
instruction of L , the interpreter I L o
L uses instructions in L o which corresponds
to an instruction in language L . Such decoding is not a real translation—the code
corresponding to an instruction of L is directly executed by the interpreter, not given
as output.

3 There is no loss of generality in considering only one input datum, given that it can stand for a set
of data.

14

1 Abstract Machines

Input data

Program
written in L

Compiler
from L to LO

Program
written in LO

Output data

Execution on MA

Execution MO

Abstract machine MA

Host machine MO

Fig. 1.5 Pure compiled implementation

We have deliberately not speciﬁed the nature of the machine M oL o. The language
L o can therefore be a high-level language, a low-level language or a ﬁrmware one.

Purely Compiled Implementation

With purely compiled implementation, as shown in Fig. 1.5, the implementation of
L takes place by explicitly translating programs written in L to programs written in
L o. The translation is performed by a special program called compiler; it is denoted
by CL ,L o. In this case, the language L is usually called the source language, while
language L o is called the object language. To execute a program PL (written in
language L ) on input data D, we must ﬁrst execute CL ,L o and give it P L as
input. This will produce a compiled program PcL o as its output (written in L o).
At this point, we can execute PcL o on the machine M oL o supplying it with input
data D to obtain the desired result.

Deﬁnition 1.4 (Compiler) A compiler from L to L o is a program which imple-
ments a function:

CL ,L o : Pr og

L → Pr og

L o

such that, given a program PL , if

CL ,L o(P L ) = Pc

L o,

then, for every Input∈ D 4 :

P L (Input) = Pc

L o(Input)

(1.2)

(1.3)

Note that, unlike pure interpretation, the translation phase described in (1.2) (called
compilation) is separate from the execution phase, which is handled by (1.3). Com-
pilation indeed produces a program as output. This program can be executed at any

4 For simplicity, we assume that the data upon which programs operate are the same for source and
object languages. If were not the case, the data would also have to be translated in an appropriate
manner.

1.2 Implementation of a Language

15

time we want. It should be noted that if M oL o is the only machine available to us,
and therefore if L o is the only language that we can use, the compiler will also be a
program written in L o. This is not necessary, however, for the compiler could in fact
be executed on another abstract machine altogether and this, latter, machine could
execute a different language, even though it produces executable code for M oL o.

Comparing the Two Techniques

Having presented the purely interpreted and purely compiled implementation tech-
niques, we will now discuss the advantages and disadvantages of these two
approaches.

As far as the purely interpreted implementation is concerned, the main disadvan-
tage is its low efﬁciency. In fact, given that there is no translation phase, in order to
execute the program PL , the interpreter I L o
L must perform a decoding of L ’s
constructs while it executes. Hence, as part of the time required for the execution
of P L , it is also necessary to add in the time required to perform decoding. For
example, if the language L contains the iterative construct for and if this construct
is not present in language L o, to execute a command such as:

P1 : for ( I = 1 , I <= n , I = I +1) C ;
the interpreter I L o
L must decode this command at runtime and, in its place, execute
a series of operations implementing the loop. This might look something like the
following code fragment:

P2 :

R1 = 1
R2 = n

L1 : if R1 > R2 then goto L2

t r a n s l a t i o n of C
...
R1 = R1 + 1
goto L1

L2 : ...

It is important to repeat that, as shown in (1.1), the interpreter does not generate
code. The code shown immediately above is not explicitly produced by the interpreter
but only describes the operations that the interpreter must execute at runtime once it
has decoded the for command.

It can also be seen that for every occurrence of the same command in a program
written in L , the interpreter must perform a separate decoding steep; this does
not improve performance. In our example, the command C inside the loop must be
decoded n times, clearly with consequent inefﬁciency.

As often happens, the disadvantages in terms of efﬁciency are compensated for by
advantages in terms of ﬂexibility. Indeed, interpreting the constructs of the program
that we want to execute at runtime allows direct interaction with whatever is running
the program. This is particularly important, for example, because it makes deﬁning
program debugging tools relatively easy. In general, moreover, the development of

16

1 Abstract Machines

an interpreter is simpler than the development of a compiler; for this reason, inter-
pretative solutions are preferred when it is necessary to implement a new language
within a short time. It should be noted, ﬁnally, that an interpretative implementation
allows a considerable reduction in memory usage, given that the program is stored
only in its source version (that is, in the language L ) and no new code is produced,
even if this consideration is not particularly important today.

The advantages and disadvantages of the compilational and interpretative

approaches to languages are dual to each other.

The translation of the source program, PL , to an object program, PcL o, occurs
independently from the execution of PcL o. If we neglect the time taken for com-
pilation, therefore, the execution of PcL o will turn out to be more efﬁcient than
an interpretive implementation because the former does not have the overhead of
the instruction decoding phase. In our ﬁrst example, the program fragment P1 will
be translated into fragment P2 by the compiler. Later, when necessary, P2 will exe-
cuted without having to decode the for instruction again. Furthermore, unlike in the
case of an interpreter, decoding an instruction of language L is performed once by
the compiler, independent of the number of times this instruction occurs at runtime.
In our example, the command C is decoded and translated once only at compile
time and the code produced by this is executed n times at runtime. In Sect. 2.4, we
will describe the structure of a compiler, together with the optimisations that can be
applied to the code it produces.

One of the major disadvantages of the compilation approach is that—without
further actions—it loses all information about the structure of the source program.
This loss makes runtime interaction with the program more difﬁcult. For example,
when an error occurs at runtime, it can be difﬁcult to determine which source-
program command caused it, given that the command will have been compiled into a
sequence of object-language instructions. In such a case, it can be difﬁcult, therefore,
to implement debugging tools; more generally, there is less ﬂexibility than afforded
by the interpretative approach.

1.2.3 Implementation: The Real Case and the Intermediate Machine

The purely compiled and the purely interpreted implementations can be considered
as the two extreme cases of what happens in practice when a programming language
is implemented. In fact, in real language implementations, both these elements are
almost always present. As far as the interpreted implementation is concerned, we
immediately observe that every “real” interpreter operates on an internal represen-
tation of a program which is always different from the external one. To get from the
external notation of L to its internal representation, a proper translation (compila-
tion, in our terminology) is done from L to an intermediate language. The interme-
diate language is the one that is interpreted. Analogously, in every compiling imple-
mentation, some particularly complex constructs are simulated. For example, some
instructions for input/output could be translated into the physical machine’s language
but would require a few hundred instructions, so it is preferable to translate them

1.2 Implementation of a Language

17

Can the Interpreter and Compiler Always be Implemented?

At this point, the reader could ask if the implementation of an interpreter or a compiler will always
be possible. Or rather, given the language, L , that we want to implement, how can we be sure
that it is possible to implement a particular program I L o
in language L o which performs the
interpretation of all the constructs of L ? How, furthermore, can we be sure that it is possible to
translate programs of L into programs in L o using a suitable program, CL ,L o?

L

The precise answer to this question requires notions from computability theory which will be
introduced in Chap. 3. For the time being, we can only answer that the existence of the interpreter and
compiler is guaranteed, provided that the language, L o, that we are using for the implementation
is sufﬁciently expressive with respect to the language, L , that we want to implement. As we will
see, every language in common use have the same (maximum) expressive power and this coincides
with a particular abstract model of computation that we will call Turing machine. We will always
assume that this the case also for our L o. This means that every possible computational process
can be implemented by a program written in L o. Given that the interpreter for L is no more than
a particular algorithm that can execute the instructions of L , there is no theoretical difﬁculty in
implementing the interpreter I L o
L . As far as the compiler is concerned, assuming that it, too, is to
be written in L o, the argument is similar. Given that L is no more expressive than L o, it must
be possible to translate programs in L into ones in L o in a way that preserves their meaning.
Furthermore, given that, by assumption, L o permits to write a program for any computational
process, it will also permit the implementation of the particular compiling program CL ,L o that
implements the translation.

into calls to some appropriate program (or directly to operating system operations),
which simulates at runtime (and therefore interprets) the high-level instructions.

The real situation for the implementation of a high-level language is therefore
that shown in Fig. 1.6. Let us assume, as above, that we have a language L that has
to be implemented and assume also that a host machine M oL o exists which has
already been constructed. Between the machine ML that we want to implement and
the host machine, there exists a further level characterised by its own language, L i
and by its associated abstract machine, M iL i , which we will call, the intermediate
language and intermediate machine, respectively.

Input data

Program
written in L

Compiler
from L to Li

Program
written in Li

Program
written in L

Compiler
from L to Li

Program
written in Li

Compilation on M A

Interpreter for Li
written
in Lo or SRT

Output data

Execution on M O

M A

M O

Fig. 1.6 Implementation: the real case with intermediate machine

18

1 Abstract Machines

As shown in Fig. 1.6, we have both a compiler CL ,L i which translates L to L i
and an interpreter I L o
L i which runs on the machine M oL o (which simulates the
machine M iL i ). In order to execute a generic program, PL , the program must
ﬁrst be translated by the compiler into an intermediate language program, Pi L i .
Next, this program is executed by the interpreter I L o
L i . In the ﬁgure, we have written
“interpreter or runtime support (RTS)” because it is not always necessary to imple-
ment the entire interpreter I L o
L i . In the case in which the intermediate language and
the host machine language are not too distant, it might be enough to use the host
machine’s interpreter, extended by suitable programs, which are referred to as its
runtime support, to simulate the intermediate machine.

Depending on the distance between the intermediate level and the source or host
level, we will have different types of implementation. Summarising this, we can
identify the following cases:

1. ML = M iL i : purely interpreted implementation.
2. ML (cid:5)= M iL i (cid:5)= M oL o.

(a) If the interpreter of the intermediate machine is substantially different from
the interpreter for M oL o, we will say that we have an implementation of an
interpretative type.

(b) If the interpreter of the intermediate machine is substantially the same as the
interpreter for M oL o (of which it extends some of its functionality), we will
say that we have a implementation of a compiled type.
3. M iL i = M oL o, we have a purely compiled implementation.

The ﬁrst and last cases correspond to the limit cases already encountered in the
previous section. These are the cases in which the intermediate machines coincide,
respectively, with the machine for the language to be implemented and with the host
machine.

On the other hand, in the case in which the intermediate machine is present, we
have an implementation of interpreted type when the interpreter for the intermedi-
ate machine is substantially different from the interpreter for M oL o. In this case,
therefore, the interpreter I L o
L i must be implemented using language L o. The dif-
ference between this solution and the purely interpreted one lies in the fact that not
all constructs of L need be simulated. For some constructs there are directly corre-
sponding ones in the host machine’s language, when they are translated from L to
the intermediate language L i, so no simulation is required. Moreover the distance
between M iL i and M oL o is such that the constructs for which this happens are
few in number and therefore the interpreter for the intermediate machine must have
many of its components simulated.

In the compiled implementation, on the other hand, the intermediate language is
closer to the host machine, therefore the interpreter of the intermediate language is a
simple extension of the one of the host machine. In this case, then, the intermediate
machine, M iL i , will be implemented using the functionality of M oL o, suitably
extended to handle those source language constructs of L which, when also trans-

1.2 Implementation of a Language

19

lated into the intermediate language L i, do not have an immediate equivalent on
the host machine. This is the case, for example, of some I/O operations that are,
even when compiled, usually simulated by suitable programs written in L o. The
set of such programs, which extend the functionality of the host machine and which
simulate at runtime some of the functionalities of the language L i, and therefore
also of the language L , constitute the so-called run-time support for L .

As can be gathered from this discussion, the distinction between the intermediate
cases is not clear. There exists a whole spectrum of implementation types ranging
from that in which everything is simulated to the case in which everything is, instead,
translated into the host machine language. What to simulate and what to translate
depends a great deal on the language in question and on the available host machine. It
is clear that, in principle, one would tend to interpret those language constructs which
are furthest from the host machine language and to compile the rest. Furthermore, as
usual, compiled solutions are preferred in cases where increased execution efﬁciency
of programs is desired, while the interpreted approach will be increasingly preferred
when greater ﬂexibility is required.

It should also be noted that the intermediate machine, even if it is always present in
principle, is not often made explicit (think, for instance, of the reference implemen-
tations of C). In other cases, there are languages that have formally stated deﬁnitions
of their intermediate machines, together with their associated languages. This is
principally done for portability reasons. Indeed, the compiled implementation of a
language on a new hardware platform is a rather big task requiring considerable
effort. The interpretive implementation is less demanding but does requires some
effort and poses efﬁciency problems. Often, it is desired to implement a language
on many different platforms, for example, when sending programs across a network
so that they can be executed on several remote machines. In this case, it is conve-
nient ﬁrst to compile the programs to an intermediate language and then implement
(interpret) the intermediate language on various platforms. The implementation of
the intermediate code is much easier than implementing the source code, given that
(some) compilation has already been carried out. This solution to the portability of
implementations was adopted for the ﬁrst time on a large scale by the Pascal language,
which was deﬁned together with an intermediate machine (with its own language,
P-code) which was designed speciﬁcally for this purpose. Similar solutions are now
used by most modern programming languages. A Java program is ﬁrst compiled
into an intermediate language called Java bytecode, which is the language of the
intermediate machine called JVM—Java Virtual Machine—which is implemented
via interpretation. Python has a simple compiler to Python bytecode, which is then
interpreted. Java and Python, however, differ signiﬁcantly: in the case of Python the
burden of the implementation is mostly on the bytecode interpreter (which explains
why one of the intended uses of Python is the interaction with its “shell”, as well as
why we usually hear that “Python is an interpreted language”).

As a last note, let us emphasise that we should not speak of an “interpreted lan-
guage” or a “compiled language”—any language can be implemented using either
of these techniques. Instead, one should speak of interpretative or compiled imple-
mentations of a language.

20

1 Abstract Machines

1.3 Hierarchies of Abstract Machines

On the basis of what we have seen, a microprogrammed computer, on which a
high-level programming language is implemented, can be represented as shown in
Fig. 1.7. Each level implements an abstract machine with its own language and its
own functionality.

This schema can be extended to an arbitrary number of levels and a hierarchy
is thus produced, even if it is not always explicit. This hierarchy is largely used in
software design. In other words, hierarchies of abstract machines are often used in
which every machine exploits the functionality of the level immediately below and
adds new functionality of its own for the level immediately above. There are many
examples of hierarchies of this type. When we write a program P in a language, L ,
we may say that we are deﬁning a new language, LP (and therefore implementing
a new abstract machine) composed of the functionalities that P provides to the user
through its interface. Such a program can therefore be used by another program,
which will deﬁne new functionalities and therefore a new language and so on. We
can also speak of abstract machines when dealing with a set of commands, which,
strictly speaking, do not constitute a real programming language. This is the case with
a program, with the functionality of an operating system, or with the functionality
of a middleware level in a computer network.

In the general case, therefore, we have a hierarchy of machines ML 0, ML 1, . . . ,
ML n. The generic machine, ML i is implemented by exploiting the functionality
(that is the language) of the machine immediately below (ML i−1). At the same
time, ML i provides its own language Li to the machine above ML i+1, which, by
exploiting that language, uses the new functionalities that ML i provides in addition
to the ones of the lower levels. Often, such a hierarchy also has the task of masking
lower levels. In this case, ML i cannot directly access the resources provided by the
machines below it but can only make use of whatever language Li−1 provides.

The structuring of a software system in terms of layers of abstract machines is
useful for controlling the system’s complexity and, in particular, allows for a degree
of independence between the various layers, in the sense that any modiﬁcation to the
internal implementation of the functionality of a layer does not have (or should not
have) any inﬂuence on the other layers. For example, if we use a high-level language,
L , which uses an operating system’s ﬁle-handling mechanisms, any modiﬁcation to
these mechanisms (while the interface remains the same) does not have any impact
on programs written in L .

Fig. 1.7 The three levels of a
microprogrammed computer

Software

Firmware

Hardware

1.3 Hierarchies of Abstract Machines

21

Fig. 1.8 A hierarchy of
abstract machines

E-Business machine (on-line commerce applications)

Web Service machine (languages for web services)

Web machine (browser etc.)

High-level language machine (Java)

Intermediate machine (Java Bytecode)

Operating System machine

Firmware machine

Hardware machine

A canonical example of a hierarchy of this kind in a context that is seemingly
distant from programming languages is the hierarchy5 of communications protocols
in a network of computers, such as, for example, the ISO/OSI standard.

In a context closer to the subject of this book, we can consider the example shown
in Fig. 1.8. At the lowest level, we have a hardware computer, implemented using
physical electronic devices. Above this level, we could have the level of an abstract,
microprogrammed machine. Immediately above (or directly above the hardware if the
ﬁrmware level is not present), there is the abstract machine provided by the operating
system which is implemented by programs written in machine language. Such a
machine can be, in turn, seen as a hierarchy of many layers (kernel, memory manager,
peripheral manager, ﬁle system, command-language interpreter) which implement
functionalities that are progressively more remote from the physical machine: starting
with the core, which interacts with the hardware and manages process state changes,
to the command interpreter (or shell) which allows users to interact with the operating
system. In its complexity, therefore, the operating system on one hand extends the
functionality of the physical machine, providing functionalities not present on the
physical machine (for example, primitives that operate on ﬁles) to higher levels.
On the other hand, it masks some hardware primitives (for example, primitives for
handling I/O) in which the higher levels in the hierarchy have no interest in seeing
directly. The abstract machine provided by the operating system forms the host
machine on which a high-level programming language is implemented using the
methods that we discussed in previous sections. It normally uses an intermediate
machine, which, in the diagram (Fig. 1.8), is the Java Virtual machine and its bytecode
language. The level provided by the abstract machine for the high-level language
that we have implemented (Java in this case) is not normally the last level of the
hierarchy. At this point, in fact, we could have one or more applications which
together provide new services. For example, we may have a “web machine” level

5 In the literature on networks, one often speaks of a stack rather than of a hierarchy.

22

1 Abstract Machines

Program Transformation and Partial Evaluation
In addition to “translation” of programs from one language to another, as is done by a compiler, there
are numerous transformation techniques involving only one language that operate upon programs.
These techniques are principally deﬁned with the aim of improving performance. Partial evaluation
is one of these techniques and consists of evaluating a program against an input so as to produce a
program that is specialised with respect to this input and which is more efﬁcient than the original
program. For example, assume we have a program P(X, Y ) which, after processing the data X ,
performs operations on the data in Y depending upon the result of working on X . If the data, X ,
input to the program are almost always the same, we can transform this program to P (cid:2)(Y ), where
the computations using X have already been performed (prior to runtime) and thereby obtain a
faster program.

More formally, a partial evaluator for the language L is a program which implements the

function:

PevalL : (ProgL × D) → ProgL
which has the following characteristics. Given any program, P, written in L , taking two arguments,
the result of partially evaluating P with respect to one of its ﬁrst input D1 is:

PevalL (P, D1) = P (cid:2)

where the program P (cid:2) (the result of the partial evaluation) accepts a single argument and is such
that, for any input data, Y , we have:

IL (P, (D1, Y )) = IL (P (cid:2), Y )

where IL is the language interpreter.

in which the functions required to process Web communications (communications
protocols, HTML code display, applet running, etc.) are implemented. Above this,
we might ﬁnd the “Web Service” level providing the functions required to make web
services interact, both in terms of interaction protocols as well as of the behaviour of
the processes involved. At this level, truly new languages can be implemented that
deﬁne the behaviour of so-called “business processes” based on Web services (an
example is the Business Process Execution Language). Finally, at the top level, we
ﬁnd a speciﬁc application, in our case electronic commerce, which, while providing
highly speciﬁc and restricted functionality, can also be seen in terms of a ﬁnal abstract
machine.

1.4 Summary

The chapter has introduced the concepts of abstract machine and the principle meth-
ods for implementing a programming language. In particular, we have seen:

• The abstract machine: an abstract formalisation for a generic executor of algo-

rithms, formalised in terms of a speciﬁc programming language.

1.6 Exercises

23

• The interpreter: an essential component of the abstract machine which charac-
terises its behaviour, relating in operational terms the language of the abstract
machine to the embedding physical world.

• The machine language: the language of a generic abstract machine.
• Different language typologies: characterised by their distance from the physical

machine.

• The implementation of a language: in its different forms, from purely interpreted

to purely compiled; the concept of compiler is particularly important here.

• The concept of intermediate language: essential in the real implementation of any
language; there are some famous examples (P-code machine for Pascal and the
Java Virtual Machine).

• Hierarchies of abstract machines: abstract machines can be hierarchically com-

posed and many software systems can be seen in such terms.

1.5 Bibliographical Notes

The concept of abstract machine is present in many different contexts, from pro-
gramming languages to operating systems, even if sometimes used in a much more
informal manner than in this chapter. In some cases, it is called virtual machine, as
for example in [1], which uses an approach similar to the one adopted here.

Descriptions of hardware machines may be found in any textbook on computer

architecture, for example [2].

The intermediate machine was introduced in the ﬁrst implementations of Pascal,
see [3]. For more recent uses of them for Java implementations, consult one of the
texts on the JVM, for example, [4].

For compilation techniques, the classic textbook is [5], or see [6] for a more recent

approach.

1.6 Exercises

1. Give three examples, in different contexts, of abstract machines.
2. Describe the functioning of the interpreter for a generic abstract machine.
3. Describe the differences between the interpretative and compiled implementations
of a programming language, emphasising the advantages and disadvantages.
4. Assume you have available an already-implemented abstract machine, C, how
could you use it to implement an abstract machine for another language, L?
5. What are the advantages in using an intermediate machine for the implementation

of a language?

24

1 Abstract Machines

6. The ﬁrst Pascal environments included:

• A Pascal compiler, written in Pascal, which produced P-code (code for the

intermediate machine);

• The same compiler, translated into P-code;
• An interpreter for P-code written in Pascal.

To implement the Pascal language in an interpretative way on a new host machine
means (manually) translating the P-code interpreter into the language on the
host machine. Given such an interpretative implementation, how can one obtain
a compiled implementation for the same host machine, minimising the effort
required? (Hint: think about a modiﬁcation to the compiler for Pascal also written
in Pascal.)

7. Consider an interpreter, I L
L 1

(X, Y ), written in language L , for a different lan-
guage, L 1, where X is the program to be interpreted and Y is its input data.
Consider a program P written in L 1. What is obtained by evaluating

PevalL (I L
L 1

, P)

i.e., from the partial evaluation of I L
is known as Futamura’s ﬁrst projection.)

L 1 with respect to P? (This transformation

References

1. T.W. Pratt, M.V. Zelkowitz, Programming Languages: Design and Implementation, 4th edn.

(Pearson, 2000)

2. A.S. Tannenbaum, T. Austin. Structured Computer Organization, 6th edn. (Prentice-Hall, 2013)
3. S. Pemberton, M. Daniels, Pascal Implementation: The P4 Compiler and Interpreter (Ellis

Horwood, 1982)

4. T. Lindholm, F. Yellin, The Java Virtual Machine Speciﬁcation, 2nd edn (Sun and Addison-

Wesley, 1999)

5. A.V. Aho, M.S. Lam, R. Sethi, J.D. Ullman, Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools, 2nd

edn. (Pearson Education, 2006)

6. A.W. Appel, Modern Compiler Implementation in Java, 2nd edn. (Cambridge University Press,

2002). This text exists also for C and ML

