# Fuente
- archivo: 025-184.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/Robert W. Sebesta - Concepts of Programming Languages-Pearson (2019)/025-184.pdf
- extraido: 2026-04-27T21:02:06

# Contenido

1 

Preliminaries

1.1  Reasons for Studying Concepts of Programming Languages

1.2  Programming Domains

1.3  Language Evaluation Criteria

1.4  Influences on Language Design

1.5  Language Categories

1.6  Language Design Trade-Offs

1.7  Implementation Methods

1.8  Programming Environments

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   1

1/5/18   11:10 PM

1

2 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

Before we begin discussing the concepts of programming languages, we must 

consider a few preliminaries. First, we explain some reasons why computer 
science students and professional software developers should study general 

approaches to language design and evaluation. This discussion is especially valuable 
for those who believe that a working knowledge of one or two programming languages 
is sufficient for computer scientists. Then, we briefly describe the major programming 
domains. Next, because the book evaluates language constructs and features, we 
 present a list of criteria that can serve as a basis for such judgments. Then, we discuss 
the two major influences on language design: machine architecture and program 
design methodologies. After that, we introduce the major categories of programming 
languages. Next, we describe a few of the most important trade-offs that must be 
 considered during language design.

Because this book is also about the implementation of programming  languages, 

this chapter includes an overview of the most common general approaches to 
 implementation. Finally, we briefly describe a few examples of programming 
 environments and discuss their impact on software production.

1.1  Reasons for Studying Concepts of Programming Languages

It is natural for students to wonder how they will benefit from the study of 
programming language concepts. After all, many other topics in computer 
 science are worthy of serious study. In fact, many now believe that there are 
more important areas of computing for study than can be covered in a four-year 
college curriculum. The following is what we believe to be a compelling list of 
potential benefits of studying concepts of programming languages:

•  Increased capacity to express ideas. It is widely believed that the depth at which 
people can think is inf luenced by the expressive power of the language in 
which they communicate their thoughts. Those with only a weak under-
standing of natural language are limited in the complexity of their thoughts, 
particularly in depth of abstraction. In other words, it is difficult for people 
to conceptualize structures they cannot describe, verbally or in writing.

Programmers, in the process of developing software, are similarly con-
strained. The language in which they develop software places limits on 
the kinds of control structures, data structures, and abstractions they can 
use; thus, the forms of algorithms they can construct are likewise limited. 
Awareness of a wider variety of programming language features can reduce 
such limitations in software development. Programmers can increase the 
range of their software development thought processes by learning new 
language constructs.

It might be argued that learning the capabilities of other languages does 
not help a programmer who is forced to use a language that lacks those 
capabilities. That argument does not hold up, however, because often, 
 language constructs can be simulated in other languages that do not sup-
port those constructs directly. For example, a C (Harbison and Steele, 
2002) programmer who had learned the structure and uses of associative 

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   2

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
1.1  Reasons for Studying Concepts of Programming Languages 

  3

arrays  in  Perl  (Christianson  et  al.,  2013)  might  design  structures  that 
 simulate associative arrays in that language. In other words, the study of 
programming language concepts builds an appreciation for valuable lan-
guage features and constructs and encourages programmers to use them, 
even when  the language  they are using  does  not  directly  support such 
features and constructs.

•  Improved background for choosing appropriate languages. Some professional 
programmers have had little formal education in computer science; rather, 
they have developed their programming skills independently or through 
in-house training programs. Such training programs often limit instruction 
to one or two languages that are directly relevant to the current projects 
of the organization. Other programmers received their formal training 
years ago. The languages they learned then are no longer widely used, and 
many features now available in programming languages were not com-
monly known at the time. The result is that many programmers, when 
given a choice of languages for a new project, use the language with which 
they are most familiar, even if it is poorly suited for the project at hand. 
If these programmers were familiar with a wider range of languages and 
language constructs, they would be better able to choose the language with 
the features that best address the problem.

Some of the features of one language often can be simulated in another 
language. However, it is preferable to use a feature whose design has been 
integrated into a language than to use a simulation of that feature, which 
is often less elegant, more cumbersome, and less safe.

•  Increased ability to learn new languages. Computer programming is still a rel-
atively young discipline, and design methodologies, software development 
tools, and programming languages are still in a state of continuous evolu-
tion. This makes software development an exciting profession, but it also 
means that continuous learning is essential. The process of learning a new 
programming language can be lengthy and difficult, especially for someone 
who is comfortable with only one or two languages and has never examined 
programming language concepts in general. Once a thorough understand-
ing of the fundamental concepts of languages is acquired, it becomes far 
easier to see how these concepts are incorporated into the design of the 
language being learned. For example, programmers who understand the 
concepts of object-oriented programming will have a much easier time 
learning Ruby (Thomas et al., 2013) than those who have never used those 
concepts.

The same phenomenon occurs in natural languages. The better you 
know the grammar of your native language, the easier it is to learn a sec-
ond language. Furthermore, learning a second language has the benefit of 
teaching you more about your first language.

The TIOBE Programming Community issues an index (http://www 
.tiobe.com/index.php/content/paperinfo/tpci/index.htm) that 
is an indicator of the relative popularity of programming languages. For 
example, according to the index, Java, C, C++ (Lippman et al., 2012), and 

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   3

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
4 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

C# (Albahari and Abrahari, 2012) were the four most popular languages in 
use in  February 2017.1 However, dozens of other languages were widely 
used at the time. The index data also show that the distribution of usage of 
programming languages is always changing. The number of languages in 
use and the dynamic nature of the statistics imply that every software devel-
oper must be prepared to learn different languages.

Finally, it is essential that practicing programmers know the vocabulary 
and fundamental concepts of programming languages so they can read and 
understand programming language descriptions and evaluations, as well as 
promotional literature for languages and compilers. These are the sources 
of information needed in order to choose and learn a language.

•  Better understanding of the significance of implementation. In learning the con-
cepts of programming languages, it is both interesting and necessary to 
touch on the implementation issues that affect those concepts. In some 
cases, an understanding of implementation issues leads to an understanding 
of why languages are designed the way they are. In turn, this knowledge 
leads to the ability to use a language more intelligently, as it was designed 
to be used. We can become better programmers by understanding the 
choices among programming language constructs and the consequences 
of those choices.

Certain kinds of program bugs can be found and fixed only by a pro-
grammer who knows some related implementation details. Another benefit 
of understanding implementation issues is that it allows us to visualize 
how  a  computer  executes  various  language  constructs.  In  some  cases, 
some knowledge of implementation issues provides hints about the rela-
tive  efficiency of alternative constructs that may be chosen for a program. 
For example, programmers who know little about the complexity of the 
implementation of subprogram calls often do not realize that a small sub-
program that is frequently called can be a highly inefficient design choice.
Because this book touches on only a few of the issues of implementa-
tion, the previous two paragraphs also serve well as rationale for studying 
compiler design.

•  Better use of languages that are already known. Most contemporary program-
ming languages are large and complex. Accordingly, it is uncommon for 
a programmer to be familiar with and use all of the features of a language 
he or she uses. By studying the concepts of programming languages, pro-
grammers can learn about previously unknown and unused parts of the 
languages they already use and begin to use those features.

•  Overall advancement of computing. Finally, there is a global view of comput-
ing that can justify the study of programming language concepts. Although 
it is usually possible to determine why a particular programming language 
became popular, many believe, at least in retrospect, that the most popular 

1.  Note that this index is only one measure of the popularity of programming languages, and 

its accuracy is not universally accepted.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   4

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
 
1.2  Programming Domains 

  5

languages are not always the best available. In some cases, it might be 
concluded that a language became widely used, at least in part, because 
those in positions to choose languages were not sufficiently familiar with 
programming language concepts.

For example, many people believe it would have been better if ALGOL 
60 (Backus et al., 1963) had displaced Fortran (ISO/IEC 1539-1, 2010) in 
the early 1960s, because it was more elegant and had much better control 
statements, among other reasons. That it did not, is due partly to the pro-
grammers and software development managers of that time, many of whom 
did not clearly understand the conceptual design of ALGOL 60. They 
found its description difficult to read (which it was) and even more difficult 
to understand. They did not appreciate the benefits of block structure, 
recursion, and well-structured control statements, so they failed to see the 
benefits of ALGOL 60 over Fortran.

Of course, many other factors contributed to the lack of acceptance 
of ALGOL 60, as we will see in Chapter 2. However, the fact that com-
puter users were generally unaware of the benefits of the language played 
a  significant role.

In general, if those who choose languages were well informed, perhaps 

better languages would eventually squeeze out poorer ones.

1.2  Programming Domains

Computers have been applied to a myriad of different areas, from controlling 
nuclear power plants to providing video games in mobile phones. Because of 
this great diversity in computer use, programming languages with very different 
goals have been developed. In this section, we brief ly discuss a few of the most 
common areas of computer applications and their associated languages.

1.2.1  Scientific Applications

The first digital computers, which appeared in the late 1940s and early 1950s, 
were invented and used for scientific applications. Typically, the scientific appli-
cations of that time used relatively simple data structures, but required large 
numbers of f loating-point arithmetic computations. The most common data 
structures were arrays and matrices; the most common control structures were 
counting loops and selections. The early high-level programming languages 
invented for scientific applications were designed to provide for those needs. 
Their competition was assembly language, so efficiency was a primary concern. 
The first language for scientific applications was Fortran. ALGOL 60 and most 
of its descendants were also intended to be used in this area, although they were 
designed to be used in related areas as well. For some scientific applications 
where efficiency is the primary concern, such as those that were common in the 
1950s and 1960s, no subsequent language is significantly better than Fortran, 
which explains why Fortran is still used.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   5

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
6 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

1.2.2  Business Applications

The use of computers for business applications began in the 1950s. Special 
computers  were  developed  for  this  purpose,  along  with  special  languages. 
The first successful high-level language for business was COBOL (ISO/IEC, 
2002), the initial version of which appeared in 1960. It probably still is the most 
 commonly used language for these applications. Business languages are charac-
terized by facilities for producing elaborate reports, precise ways of describing 
and storing decimal numbers and character data, and the ability to specify 
decimal arithmetic operations.

There have been few developments in business application languages out-
side the development and evolution of COBOL. Therefore, this book includes 
only limited discussions of the structures in COBOL.

1.2.3  Artificial Intelligence

Artificial intelligence (AI) is a broad area of computer applications charac-
terized by the use of symbolic rather than numeric computations. Symbolic 
computation means that symbols, consisting of names rather than numbers, 
are manipulated. Also, symbolic computation is more conveniently done with 
linked lists of data rather than arrays. This kind of programming sometimes 
requires more f lexibility than other programming domains. For example, in 
some AI applications the ability to create and execute code segments during 
execution is convenient.

The first widely used programming language developed for AI applications 
was the functional language Lisp (McCarthy et al., 1965), which appeared in 
1959. Most AI applications developed prior to 1990 were written in Lisp or one 
of its close relatives. During the early 1970s, however, an alternative approach 
to some of these applications appeared—logic programming using the Prolog 
(Clocksin and Mellish, 2013) language. More recently, some AI applications 
have been written in systems languages such as Python (Lutz, 2013). Scheme 
(Dybvig, 2011), a dialect of Lisp, and Prolog are introduced in Chapters 15 
and 16, respectively.

1.2.4  Web Software

The World Wide Web is supported by an eclectic collection of languages, 
ranging from markup languages, such as HTML, which is not a programming 
language, to general-purpose programming languages, such as Java. Because 
of the pervasive need for dynamic Web content, some computation capability 
is often included in the technology of content presentation. This function-
ality can be provided by embedding programming code in an HTML docu-
ment. Such code is often in the form of a scripting language, such as JavaScript  
(Flanagan, 2011) or PHP (Tatroe et al., 2013). There are also some markup-like 
languages that have been extended to include constructs that control document 
processing, which are discussed in Section 1.5 and in Chapter 2.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   6

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
1.3  Language Evaluation Criteria

1.3  Language Evaluation Criteria 

  7

As noted previously, the purpose of this book is to examine carefully the under-
lying concepts of the various constructs and capabilities of programming lan-
guages. We will also evaluate these features, focusing on their impact on the 
software development process, including maintenance. To do this, we need a set 
of evaluation criteria. Such a list of criteria is necessarily controversial, because 
it is difficult to get even two computer scientists to agree on the value of some 
given language characteristic relative to others. In spite of these differences, most 
would agree that the criteria discussed in the following subsections are important.
Some of the characteristics that inf luence three of the four most important 
of these criteria are shown in Table 1.1, and the criteria themselves are dis-
cussed in the following sections.2 Note that only the most important charac-
teristics are included in the table, mirroring the discussion in the following 
subsections. One could probably make the case that if one considered less 
important characteristics, virtually all table positions could include “bullets.”

Note that some of these characteristics are broad and somewhat vague, 
such as writability, whereas others are specific language constructs, such as 
exception handling. Furthermore, although the discussion might seem to imply 
that the criteria have equal importance, that implication is not intended, and 
it is clearly not the case.

1.3.1  Readability

One of the most important criteria for judging a programming language is the 
ease with which programs can be read and understood. Before 1970, software 
development was largely thought of in terms of writing code. The primary 

Table 1.1  Language evaluation criteria and the characteristics that affect them

Characteristic
Simplicity
Orthogonality
Data types
Syntax design
Support for abstraction
Expressivity
Type checking
Exception handling
Restricted aliasing

READABILITY
•
•
•
•

CRITERIA

WRITABILITY
•
•
•
•
•
•

RELIABILITY
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

2.  The fourth primary criterion is cost, which is not included in the table because it is only 

slightly related to the other criteria and the characteristics that inf luence them.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   7

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
8 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

positive characteristic of programming languages was efficiency. Language 
constructs were designed more from the point of view of the computer than 
of the computer users. In the 1970s, however, the software life-cycle concept 
(Booch, 1987) was developed; coding was relegated to a much smaller role, 
and maintenance was recognized as a major part of the cycle, particularly in 
terms of cost. Because ease of maintenance is determined in large part by the 
readability of programs, readability became an important measure of the quality 
of programs and programming languages. This was an important juncture in 
the evolution of programming languages. There was a distinct crossover from 
a focus on machine orientation to a focus on human orientation.

Readability must be considered in the context of the problem domain. For 
example, if a program that describes a computation is written in a language not 
designed for such use, the program may be unnatural and convoluted, making 
it unusually difficult to read.

The following subsections describe characteristics that contribute to the 

readability of a programming language.

1.3.1.1  Overall Simplicity

The overall simplicity of a programming language strongly affects its readabil-
ity. A language with a large number of basic constructs is more difficult to learn 
than one with a smaller number. Programmers who must use a large language 
often learn a subset of the language and ignore its other features. This learning 
pattern is sometimes used to excuse the large number of language constructs, 
but that argument is not valid. Readability problems occur whenever the pro-
gram’s author has learned a different subset from that subset with which the 
reader is familiar.

A second complicating characteristic of a programming language is feature 
multiplicity—that is, having more than one way to accomplish a particular 
operation. For example, in Java, a user can increment a simple integer variable 
in four different ways:

count = count + 1
count += 1
count++
++count

Although the last two statements have slightly different meanings from each 
other and from the others in some contexts, all of them have the same mean-
ing when used as stand-alone expressions. These variations are discussed in 
Chapter 7.

A third potential problem is operator overloading, in which a single oper-
ator symbol has more than one meaning. Although this is often useful, it can 
lead to reduced readability if users are allowed to create their own overloading 
and do not do it sensibly. For example, it is clearly acceptable to overload + 
to use it for both integer and f loating-point addition. In fact, this overloading 

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   8

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
1.3  Language Evaluation Criteria 

  9

simplifies a language by reducing the number of operators. However, suppose 
the programmer defined + used between single-dimensioned array operands 
to mean the sum of all elements of both arrays. Because the usual meaning of 
vector addition is quite different from this, this unusual meaning could confuse 
both the author and the program’s readers. An even more extreme example of 
program confusion would be a user defining + between two vector operands 
to mean the difference between their respective first elements. Operator over-
loading is further discussed in Chapter 7.

Simplicity in languages can, of course, be carried too far. For example, 
the form and meaning of most assembly language statements are models of 
simplicity, as you can see when you consider the statements that appear in the 
next section. This very simplicity, however, makes assembly language programs 
less readable. Because they lack more complex control statements, program 
structure is less obvious; because the statements are simple, far more of them 
are required than in equivalent programs in a high-level language. These same 
arguments apply to the less extreme case of high-level languages with inade-
quate control and data-structuring constructs.

1.3.1.2  Orthogonality

Orthogonality in a programming language means that a relatively small set of 
primitive constructs can be combined in a relatively small number of ways to 
build the control and data structures of the language. Furthermore, every pos-
sible combination of primitives is legal and meaningful. For example, consider 
data types. Suppose a language has four primitive data types (integer, f loat, 
double, and character) and two type operators (array and pointer). If the two 
type operators can be applied to themselves and the four primitive data types, 
a large number of data structures can be defined.

The meaning of an orthogonal language feature is independent of the 
context of its appearance in a program. (The word orthogonal comes from the 
mathematical concept of orthogonal vectors, which are independent of each 
other.) Orthogonality follows from a symmetry of relationships among prim-
itives. A lack of orthogonality leads to exceptions to the rules of the language. 
For example, in a programming language that supports pointers, it should be 
possible to define a pointer to point to any specific type defined in the language. 
However, if pointers are not allowed to point to arrays, many potentially useful 
user-defined data structures cannot be defined.

We can illustrate the use of orthogonality as a design concept by compar-
ing one aspect of the assembly languages of the IBM mainframe computers 
and the VAX series of minicomputers. We consider a single simple situation: 
adding two 32-bit integer values that reside in either memory or registers and 
replacing one of the two values with the sum. The IBM mainframes have two 
instructions for this purpose, which have the forms

A Reg1, memory_cell 
AR Reg1, Reg2

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   9

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
10 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

where Reg1 and Reg2 represent registers. The semantics of these are

Reg1 d contents(Reg1) + contents(memory_cell)
Reg1 d contents(Reg1) + contents(Reg2)

The VAX addition instruction for 32-bit integer values is

ADDL operand_1, operand_2

whose semantics is

operand_2 d contents(operand_1) + contents(operand_2)

In this case, either operand can be a register or a memory cell.

The VAX instruction design is orthogonal in that a single instruction can 
use either registers or memory cells as its operands. There are two ways to 
specify operands, which can be combined in all possible ways. The IBM design 
is not orthogonal. Only two out of four operand combinations possibilities are 
legal, and the two require different instructions, A and AR. The IBM design 
is more restricted and therefore less writable. For example, you cannot add 
two values and store the sum in a memory location. Furthermore, the IBM 
design is more difficult to learn because of the restrictions and the additional 
instruction.

Orthogonality is closely related to simplicity: The more orthogonal the 
design of a language, the fewer exceptions the language rules require. Fewer 
exceptions mean a higher degree of regularity in the design, which makes the 
language easier to learn, read, and understand. Anyone who has learned a sig-
nificant part of the English language can testify to the difficulty of learning its 
many rule exceptions (for example, i before e except after c).

As examples of the lack of orthogonality in a high-level language, consider 
the following rules and exceptions in C. Although C has two kinds of struc-
tured data types, arrays and records (structs), records can be returned from 
functions but arrays cannot. A member of a structure can be any data type 
except void or a structure of the same type. An array element can be any data 
type except void or a function. Parameters are passed by value, unless they 
are arrays, in which case they are, in effect, passed by reference (because the 
appearance of an array name without a subscript in a C program is interpreted 
to be the address of the array’s first element).

As an example of context dependence, consider the C expression

a + b

This expression often means that the values of a and b are fetched and added 
together. However, if a happens to be a pointer and b is an integer, it affects 
the value of b. For example, if a points to a f loat value that occupies four bytes, 
then the value of b must be scaled—in this case multiplied by 4—before it is 

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   10

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
1.3  Language Evaluation Criteria 

  11

added to a. Therefore, the type of a affects the treatment of the value of b. The 
context of b affects its meaning.

Too  much  orthogonality  can  also  cause  problems.  Perhaps  the  most 
orthogonal programming language is ALGOL 68 (van Wijngaarden et al., 
1969). Every language construct in ALGOL 68 has a type, and there are no 
restrictions on those types. In addition, most constructs produce values. This 
combinational freedom allows extremely complex constructs. For example, a 
conditional can appear as the left side of an assignment, along with declarations 
and other assorted statements, as long as the result is an address. This extreme 
form of orthogonality leads to unnecessary complexity. Furthermore, because 
languages require a large number of primitives, a high degree of orthogonality 
results in an explosion of combinations. So, even if the combinations are simple, 
their sheer numbers lead to complexity.

Simplicity in a language, therefore, is at least in part the result of a com-
bination of a relatively small number of primitive constructs and a limited use 
of the concept of orthogonality.

Some believe that functional languages offer a good combination of 
simplicity and orthogonality. A functional language, such as Lisp, is one 
in which computations are made primarily by applying functions to given 
parameters. In contrast, in imperative languages such as C, C++, and Java, 
computations  are  usually  specified  with  variables  and  assignment  state-
ments. Functional languages offer potentially the greatest overall simplic-
ity,  because  they  can  accomplish  everything  with  a  single  construct,  the 
function call, which can be combined simply with other function calls. This 
simple elegance is the reason why some language researchers are attracted 
to functional languages as the primary alternative to complex nonfunctional 
languages such as Java. Other factors, the most important of which is proba-
bly efficiency, however, have prevented functional languages from becoming 
more widely used.

1.3.1.3  Data Types

The presence of adequate facilities for defining data types and data structures 
in a language is another significant aid to readability. For example, suppose a 
numeric type is used for an indicator f lag because there is no Boolean type in 
the language. In such a language, for example, in the original version of C, we 
might have an assignment such as the following:

timeout = 1

The meaning of this statement is unclear, whereas in a language that includes 
Boolean types, we would have the following:

timeout = true 

The meaning of this statement is perfectly clear.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   11

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
12 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

1.3.1.4  Syntax Design

The syntax, or form, of the elements of a language has a significant effect on 
the readability of programs. Following are some examples of syntactic design 
choices that affect readability:

•  Special words. Program appearance and thus program readability are strongly 
inf luenced by the forms of a language’s special words (for example, while, 
class, and for). Especially important is the method of forming compound 
statements, or statement groups, primarily in control constructs. Some 
languages have used matching pairs of special words or symbols to form 
groups. C and its descendants use braces to specify compound statements. 
All  of  these  languages  have  diminished  readability  because  statement 
groups are always terminated in the same way, which makes it difficult 
to determine which group is being ended when an end or a right brace 
appears. Fortran 95 and Ada (ISO/IEC, 2014) make this clearer by using a 
distinct closing syntax for each type of statement group. For example, Ada 
uses end if to terminate a selection construct and end loop to terminate 
a loop construct. This is an example of the conf lict between simplicity that 
results in fewer reserved words, as in Java, and the greater readability that 
can result from using more reserved words, as in Ada.

Another important issue is whether the special words of a language can 
be used as names for program variables. If so, then the resulting programs 
can be very confusing. For example, in Fortran 95, special words, such as 
Do and End, are legal variable names, so the appearance of these words in 
a program may or may not connote something special.

•  Form and meaning. Designing statements so that their appearance at least 
partially indicates their purpose is an obvious aid to readability. Semantics, 
or meaning, should follow directly from syntax, or form. In some cases, this 
principle is violated by two language constructs that are identical or similar in 
appearance but have different meanings, depending perhaps on context. In C, 
for example, the meaning of the reserved word static depends on the con-
text of its appearance. If used on the definition of a variable inside a function, 
it means the variable is created at compile time. If used on the definition of a 
variable that is outside all functions, then it means the variable is visible only in 
the file in which its definition appears; that is, it is not exported from that file.
One of the primary complaints about the shell commands of UNIX 
(Robbins, 2005) is that their appearance does no t always suggest their 
function. For example, the meaning of the UNIX command grep can be 
deciphered only through prior knowledge, or perhaps cleverness and famil-
iarity with the UNIX editor, ed. The appearance of grep connotes nothing 
to UNIX beginners. (In ed, the command /regular_expression/ searches for a 
substring that matches the regular expression. Preceding this with g makes 
it a global command, specifying that the scope of the search is the whole 
file being edited. Following the command with p specifies that lines with 
the matching substring are to be printed. So g/regular_expression/p, which 
can obviously be abbreviated as grep, prints all lines in a file that contain 
substrings that match its operand, which is a regular expression.)

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   12

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
1.3.2  Writability

1.3  Language Evaluation Criteria 

  13

Writability is a measure of how easily a language can be used to create programs 
for a chosen problem domain. Most of the language characteristics that affect 
readability also affect writability. This follows directly from the fact that the 
process of writing a program requires the programmer frequently to reread the 
part of the program that is already written.

As is the case with readability, writability must be considered in the context 
of the target problem domain of a language. It simply is not fair to compare 
the writability of two languages in the realm of a particular application when 
one was designed for that application and the other was not. For example, the 
writabilities of Visual BASIC (VB) (Halvorson, 2013) and C are dramatically 
different for creating a program that has a graphical user interface (GUI), for 
which VB is ideal. Their writabilities are also quite different for writing systems 
programs, such as an operating system, for which C was designed.

The  following  subsections  describe  the  most  important  characteristics 

inf luencing the writability of a language.

1.3.2.1  Simplicity and Orthogonality

If a language has a large number of different constructs, some programmers 
who use the language might not be familiar with all of them. This situation 
can lead to a misuse of some features and a disuse of others that may be either 
more elegant or more efficient, or both, than those that are used. It may even 
be possible, as noted by Hoare (1973), to use unknown features accidentally, 
with bizarre results. Therefore, a smaller number of primitive constructs and 
a consistent set of rules for combining them (that is, orthogonality) is much 
better than simply having a large number of primitives. A programmer can 
design a solution to a complex problem after learning only a simple set of 
primitive constructs.

On the other hand, too much orthogonality can be a detriment to writ-
ability. Errors in programs can go undetected when nearly any combination of 
primitives is legal. This can lead to code absurdities that cannot be discovered 
by the compiler.

1.3.2.2  Expressivity

Expressivity in a language can refer to several different characteristics. In a 
language such as APL (Gilman and Rose, 1983), it means that there are very 
powerful operators that allow a great deal of computation to be accomplished 
with a very small program. More commonly, it means that a language has rel-
atively convenient, rather than cumbersome, ways of specifying computations. 
For example, in C, the notation count++ is more convenient and shorter than 
count = count + 1. Also, the and then Boolean operator in Ada is a conve-
nient way of specifying short-circuit evaluation of a Boolean expression. The 
inclusion of the for statement in Java makes writing counting loops easier than 
with the use of while, which is also possible. All of these increase the writability 
of a language.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   13

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
14 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

1.3.3  Reliability

A program is said to be reliable if it performs to its specifications under all 
conditions. The following subsections describe several language features that 
have a significant effect on the reliability of programs in a given language.

1.3.3.1  Type Checking

Type checking is simply testing for type errors in a given program, either 
by the compiler or during program execution. Type checking is an  important 
factor in language reliability. Because run-time type checking is expensive, 
compile-time type checking is more desirable. Furthermore, the earlier errors 
in programs are detected, the less expensive it is to make the required repairs. 
The  design  of  Java  requires  checks  of  the  types  of  nearly  all  variables  and 
expressions at compile time. This virtually eliminates type errors at run time 
in Java programs. Types and type checking are discussed in depth in Chapter 6.
One example of how failure to type check, at either compile time or run time, 
has led to countless program errors is the use of subprogram parameters in the 
original C language (Kernighan and Ritchie, 1978). In this language, the type of an 
actual parameter in a function call was not checked to determine whether its type 
matched that of the corresponding formal parameter in the function. An int type 
variable could be used as an actual parameter in a call to a function that expected 
a float type as its formal parameter, and neither the compiler nor the run-time 
system would detect the inconsistency. For example, because the bit string that 
represents the integer 23 is essentially unrelated to the bit string that represents a 
floating-point 23, if an integer 23 is sent to a function that expects a floating-point 
parameter, any uses of the parameter in the function will produce nonsense. Fur-
thermore, such problems are often difficult to diagnose.3 The current version of 
C has eliminated this problem by requiring all parameters to be type checked. 
Subprograms and parameter- passing techniques are discussed in Chapter 9.

1.3.3.2  Exception Handling

The ability of a program to intercept run-time errors (as well as other unusual 
conditions detectable by the program), take corrective measures, and then con-
tinue is an obvious aid to reliability. This language facility is called exception 
handling. Ada, C++, Java, and C# include extensive capabilities for exception 
handling, but such facilities are practically nonexistent in some widely used 
languages, for example, C. Exception handling is discussed in Chapter 14.

1.3.3.3  Aliasing

Loosely  defined,  aliasing  is  having  two  or  more  distinct  names  in  a  pro-
gram that can be used to access the same memory cell. It is now generally 
accepted that aliasing is a dangerous feature in a programming language. Most 

3.  In response to this and other similar problems, UNIX systems include a utility program 

named lint that checks C programs for such problems.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   14

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
 
1.3  Language Evaluation Criteria 

  15

programming languages allow some kind of aliasing—for example, two point-
ers (or references) set to point to the same variable, which is possible in most 
languages. In such a program, the programmer must always remember that 
changing the value pointed to by one of the two changes the value referenced 
by the other. Some kinds of aliasing, as described in Chapters 5 and 9, can be 
prohibited by the design of a language.

In some languages, aliasing is used to overcome deficiencies in the lan-
guage’s data abstraction facilities. Other languages greatly restrict aliasing to 
increase their reliability.

1.3.3.4  Readability and Writability

Both readability and writability inf luence reliability. A program written in a 
language that does not support natural ways to express the required algorithms 
will necessarily use unnatural approaches. Unnatural approaches are less likely 
to be correct for all possible situations. The easier a program is to write, the 
more likely it is to be correct.

Readability affects reliability in both the writing and maintenance phases 
of the life cycle. Programs that are difficult to read are difficult both to write 
and to modify.

1.3.4  Cost

The  total  cost  of  a  programming  language  is  a  function  of  many  of  its 
characteristics.

First, there is the cost of training programmers to use the language, which 
is a function of the simplicity and orthogonality of the language and the expe-
rience of the programmers. Although more powerful languages are not neces-
sarily more difficult to learn, they often are.

Second, there is the cost of writing programs in the language. This is a 
function of the writability of the language, which depends in part on its close-
ness in purpose to the particular application. The original efforts to design and 
implement high-level languages were driven by the desire to lower the costs 
of creating software.

Both the cost of training programmers and the cost of writing programs in 
a language can be significantly reduced in a good programming environment. 
Programming environments are discussed in Section 1.8.

Third, the cost of executing programs written in a language is greatly 
inf luenced by that language’s design. A language that requires many run-time 
type checks will prohibit fast code execution, regardless of the quality of the 
compiler. Although execution efficiency was the foremost concern in the design 
of early languages, it is now considered to be less important.

A simple trade-off can be made between compilation cost and execution 
speed of the compiled code. Optimization is the name given to the collection 
of techniques that compilers may use to decrease the size and/or increase the 
execution speed of the code they produce. If little or no optimization is done, 
compilation can be done much faster than if a significant effort is made to 

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   15

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
16 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

produce optimized code. The choice between the two alternatives is inf luenced 
by the environment in which the compiler will be used. In a laboratory for 
beginning programming students, who often compile their programs many 
times during development but use little execution time (their programs are 
small and they must execute correctly only once), little or no optimization 
should be done. In a production environment, where compiled programs are 
executed many times after development, it is better to pay the extra cost to 
optimize the code.

Fourth, there is the cost of poor reliability. If the software fails in a critical 
system, such as a nuclear power plant or an X-ray machine for medical use, the 
cost could be very high. The failures of noncritical systems can also be very 
expensive in terms of lost future business or lawsuits over defective software 
systems.

The final consideration is the cost of maintaining programs, which includes 
both corrections and modifications to add new functionality. The cost of soft-
ware maintenance depends on a number of language characteristics, primarily 
readability. Because maintenance is often done by individuals other than the 
original author of the software, poor readability can make the task extremely 
challenging.

The importance of software maintainability cannot be overstated. It has 
been estimated that for large software systems with relatively long lifetimes, 
maintenance costs can be as high as two to four times as much as development 
costs (Sommerville, 2010).

Of all the contributors to language costs, three are most important: pro-
gram development, maintenance, and reliability. Because these are functions of 
writability and readability, these two evaluation criteria are, in turn, the most 
important.

Of course, a number of other criteria could be used for evaluating pro-
gramming languages. One example is portability, or the ease with which pro-
grams can be moved from one implementation to another. Portability is most 
strongly inf luenced by the degree of standardization of the language. Some 
languages are not standardized at all, making programs in these languages very 
difficult to move from one implementation to another. This problem is alle-
viated in some cases by the fact that implementations for some languages now 
have single sources. Standardization is a time-consuming and difficult process. 
A committee began work on producing a standard version of C++ in 1989. It 
was approved in 1998.

Generality (the applicability to a wide range of applications) and well- 
definedness (the completeness and precision of the language’s official defining 
document) are two other criteria.

Most criteria, particularly readability, writability, and reliability, are nei-
ther precisely defined nor accurately measurable. Nevertheless, they are useful 
concepts and they provide valuable insight into the design and evaluation of 
programming languages.

A final note on evaluation criteria: language design criteria are weighed 
differently from different perspectives. Language implementors are concerned 

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   16

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
1.4 

Influences on Language Design 

  17

primarily with the difficulty of implementing the constructs and features of the 
language. Language users are worried about writability first and readability 
later. Language designers are likely to emphasize elegance and the ability to 
attract widespread use. These characteristics often conf lict with one another.

1.4  Influences on Language Design

In addition to those factors described in Section 1.3, several other factors inf lu-
ence the basic design of programming languages. The most important of these 
are computer architecture and programming design methodologies.

1.4.1  Computer Architecture

The basic architecture of computers has had a profound effect on language 
design. Most of the popular languages of the past 60 years have been designed 
around  the  prevalent  computer  architecture,  called  the  von  Neumann 
 architecture, after one of its originators, John von Neumann (pronounced 
“von Noyman”). These languages are called imperative languages. In a von 
Neumann computer, both data and programs are stored in the same memory. 
The central processing unit (CPU), which executes instructions, is separate 
from the memory. Therefore, instructions and data must be transmitted, or 
piped, from memory to the CPU. Results of operations in the CPU must be 
moved back to memory. Nearly all digital computers built since the 1940s have 
been based on the von Neumann architecture. The overall structure of a von 
Neumann computer is shown in Figure 1.1.

Figure 1.1

The von Neumann  
computer architecture

Memory (stores both instructions and data)

Results of
operations

Instructions and data

Arithmetic and 
logic unit

Control
unit

Input and output devices

Central processing unit

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   17

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
18 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

Because of the von Neumann architecture, the central features of impera-
tive languages are variables, which model the memory cells; assignment state-
ments, which are based  on the piping operation; and the iterative form of 
repetition, which is the most efficient way to implement repetition on this 
architecture. Operands in expressions are piped from memory to the CPU, 
and the result of evaluating the expression is piped back to the memory cell 
represented by the left side of the assignment. Iteration is fast on von Neumann 
computers because instructions are stored in adjacent cells of memory and 
repeating the execution of a section of code requires only a branch instruction. 
This efficiency discourages the use of recursion for repetition, although recur-
sion is sometimes more natural.

The execution of a machine code program on a von Neumann architecture 
computer occurs in a process called the fetch-execute cycle. As stated earlier, 
programs reside in memory but are executed in the CPU. Each instruction to 
be executed must be moved from memory to the processor. The address of the 
next instruction to be executed is maintained in a register called the program 
counter. The fetch-execute cycle can be simply described by the following 
algorithm:

initialize the program counter
repeat forever
       fetch the instruction pointed to by the program counter
       increment the program counter to point at the next instruction
       decode the instruction
       execute the instruction
end repeat

The “decode the instruction” step in the algorithm means the instruction is 
examined to determine what action it specifies. Program execution terminates 
when a stop instruction is encountered, although on an actual computer a stop 
instruction is rarely executed. Rather, control transfers from the operating sys-
tem to a user program for its execution and then back to the operating system 
when the user program execution is complete. In a computer system in which 
more than one user program may be in memory at a given time, this process 
is far more complex.

As stated earlier, a functional, or applicative, language is one in which 
the primary means of computation is applying functions to given parameters. 
Programming can be done in a functional language without the kind of vari-
ables that are used in imperative languages, without assignment statements, 
and without iteration. Although many computer scientists have expounded 
on the myriad benefits of functional languages, such as Scheme, it is unlikely 
that they will displace the imperative languages until a non–von Neumann 
computer is designed that allows efficient execution of programs in functional 
languages. Among those who have bemoaned this fact, perhaps the most elo-
quent was John Backus (1978), the principal designer of the original version 
of Fortran.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   18

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
1.4 

Influences on Language Design 

  19

In spite of the fact that the structure of imperative programming languages 
is modeled on a machine architecture, rather than on the abilities and inclina-
tions of the users of programming languages, some believe that using imper-
ative languages is somehow more natural than using a functional language. 
So, these people believe that even if functional programs were as efficient as 
imperative programs, the use of imperative programming languages would still 
dominate.

1.4.2  Programming Design Methodologies

The late 1960s and early 1970s brought an intense analysis, begun in large part 
by the structured-programming movement, of both the software development 
process and programming language design.

An important reason for this research was the shift in the major cost of 
computing from hardware to software, as hardware costs decreased and pro-
grammer costs increased. Increases in programmer productivity were relatively 
small. In addition, progressively larger and more complex problems were being 
solved by computers. Rather than simply solving sets of equations to simulate 
satellite tracks, as in the early 1960s, programs were being written for large 
and complex tasks, such as controlling large petroleum-refining facilities and 
providing worldwide airline reservation systems.

The new software development methodologies that emerged as a result 
of the research of the 1970s were called top-down design and stepwise refine-
ment. The primary programming language deficiencies that were discovered 
were incompleteness of type checking and inadequacy of control statements 
(requiring the extensive use of gotos).

In the late 1970s, a shift from procedure-oriented to data-oriented  program 
design methodologies began. Simply put, data-oriented methods emphasize 
data design, focusing on the use of abstract data types to solve problems.

For data abstraction to be used effectively in software system design, 
it must be supported by the languages used for implementation. The first 
language to provide even limited support for data abstraction was SIMULA 
67 (Birtwistle et al., 1973), although that language certainly was not pro-
pelled to popularity because of it. The benefits of data abstraction were not 
widely recognized until the early 1970s. However, most languages designed 
since the late 1970s support data abstraction, which is discussed in detail in 
Chapter 11.

The latest step in the evolution of data-oriented software development, 
which began in the early 1980s, is object-oriented design. Object-oriented 
methodology begins with data abstraction, which encapsulates processing with 
data objects and controls access to data, and adds inheritance and dynamic 
method binding. Inheritance is a powerful concept that greatly enhances the 
potential reuse of existing software, thereby providing the possibility of signifi-
cant increases in software development productivity. This is an important factor 
in the increase in popularity of object-oriented languages. Dynamic (run-time) 
method binding allows more f lexible use of inheritance.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   19

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
20 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

Object-oriented  programming  developed  along  with  a  language  that 
supported its concepts: Smalltalk (Goldberg and Robson, 1989). Although 
Smalltalk never became as widely used as many other languages, support for 
object-oriented programming is now part of most popular imperative languages, 
including Java, C++, and C#. Object-oriented concepts have also found their 
way into functional programming in CLOS (Bobrow et al., 1988) and F# (Syme 
et al., 2010), as well as logic programming in Prolog++ (Moss, 1994). Language 
support for object-oriented programming is discussed in detail in Chapter 12.
Procedure-oriented  programming  is,  in  a  sense,  the  opposite  of  data- 
oriented programming. Although data-oriented methods now dominate soft-
ware development, procedure-oriented methods have not been abandoned. 
On  the  contrary,  in  recent  years,  a  good  deal  of  research  has  occurred  in 
 procedure-oriented programming, especially in the area of concurrency. These 
research efforts brought with them the need for language facilities for creating 
and controlling concurrent program units. Java and C# include such capabili-
ties. Concurrency is discussed in detail in Chapter 13.

All of these evolutionary steps in software development methodologies led 

to new language constructs to support them.

1.5  Language Categories

Programming  languages  are  often  categorized  into  four  bins:  imperative, 
functional, logic, and object oriented. However, we do not consider languages 
that  support  object-oriented  programming  to  form  a  separate  category  of 
languages. We have described how the most popular languages that support 
object-oriented programming grew out of imperative languages. Although 
the object-oriented software development paradigm differs significantly from 
the procedure-oriented paradigm usually used with imperative languages, the 
extensions to an imperative language required to support object-oriented pro-
gramming are not intensive. For example, the expressions, assignment state-
ments, and control statements of C and Java are nearly identical. (On the other 
hand, the arrays, subprograms, and semantics of Java are very different from 
those of C.) Similar statements can be made for functional languages that sup-
port object-oriented programming.

Some authors refer to scripting languages as a separate category of pro-
gramming languages. However, languages in this category are bound together 
more by their implementation method, partial or full interpretation, than by 
a common language design. The languages that are typically called scripting 
languages, among them Perl, JavaScript, and Ruby (Flanagan and Matsumoto, 
2008), are imperative languages in every sense.

A logic programming language is an example of a rule-based language. 
In an imperative language, an algorithm is specified in great detail, and the 
specific order of execution of the instructions or statements must be included. 
In a rule-based language, however, rules are specified in no particular order, 
and the language implementation system must choose an order in which the 

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   20

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
1.6  Language Design Trade-Offs 

  21

rules are used to produce the desired result. This approach to software devel-
opment is radically different from those used with the other two categories of 
languages and clearly requires a completely different kind of language. Prolog, 
the most commonly used logic programming language, and logic programming 
are discussed in Chapter 16.

In recent years, a new category of languages has emerged, the markup/
programming  hybrid  languages.  Markup  languages  are  not  programming 
languages. For instance, HTML, the most widely used markup language, is 
used to specify the layout of information in Web documents. However, some 
programming capability has crept into some extensions to HTML and XML. 
Among  these  are  the  Java  Server  Pages  Standard  Tag  Library  (JSTL)  and 
eXtensible Stylesheet Language Transformations (XSLT). Both of these are 
brief ly introduced in Chapter 2. Those languages cannot be compared to any 
of the complete programming languages and therefore will not be discussed 
after Chapter 2.

1.6  Language Design Trade-Offs

The  programming  language  evaluation  criteria  described  in  Section  1.3 
 provide a framework for language design. Unfortunately, that framework is 
self- contradictory. In his insightful paper on language design, Hoare (1973) 
stated that “there are so many important but conf licting criteria, that their 
reconciliation and satisfaction is a major engineering task.”

Two criteria that conf lict are reliability and cost of execution. For exam-
ple, the Java language definition demands that all references to array elements 
be checked to ensure that the index or indices are in their legal ranges. This 
step adds a great deal to the cost of execution of Java programs that contain 
large numbers of references to array elements. C does not require index range 
checking, so C programs execute faster than semantically equivalent Java pro-
grams, although Java programs are more reliable. The designers of Java traded 
execution efficiency for reliability.

As another example of conf licting criteria that leads directly to design 
trade-offs, consider the case of APL. APL includes a powerful set of opera-
tors for array operands. Because of the large number of operators, a signif-
icant number of new symbols had to be included in APL to represent the 
operators. Also, many APL operators can be used in a single, long, com-
plex expression. One result of this high degree of expressivity is that, for 
applications involving many array operations, APL is very writable. Indeed, 
a huge amount of computation can be specified in a very small program. 
Another result is that APL programs have very poor readability. A compact 
and concise expression has a certain mathematical beauty but it is difficult 
for anyone other than the programmer to understand. Well-known author 
Daniel McCracken (1970) once noted that it took him four hours to read and 
understand a four-line APL program. The designer of APL traded readability 
for writability.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   21

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
22 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

The  conf lict  between  writability  and  reliability  is  a  common  one  in 
 language design. The pointers of C++ can be manipulated in a variety of ways, 
which supports highly f lexible addressing of data. Because of the potential 
reliability problems with pointers, they are not included in Java.

Examples of conf licts among language design (and evaluation) criteria 
abound; some are subtle, others are obvious. It is therefore clear that the task 
of choosing constructs and features when designing a programming language 
requires many compromises and trade-offs.

1.7  Implementation Methods

As described in Section 1.4.1, two of the primary components of a computer 
are its internal memory and its processor. The internal memory is used to 
store programs and data. The processor is a collection of circuits that provides 
a realization of a set of primitive operations, or machine instructions, such as 
those for arithmetic and logic operations. In most computers, some of these 
instructions, which are sometimes called macroinstructions, are actually imple-
mented with a set of instructions called microinstructions, which are defined 
at an even lower level. Because microinstructions are never seen by software, 
they will not be discussed further here.

The machine language of the computer is its set of instructions. In the 
absence of other supporting software, its own machine language is the only 
language that most hardware computers “understand.” Theoretically, a com-
puter could be designed and built with a particular high-level language as its 
machine language, but it would be very complex and expensive. Furthermore, 
it would be highly inf lexible, because it would be difficult (but not impossible) 
to use it with other high-level languages. The more practical machine design 
choice implements in hardware a very low-level language that provides the 
most commonly needed primitive operations and requires system software to 
create an interface to programs in higher-level languages.

A language implementation system cannot be the only software on a com-
puter. Also required is a large collection of programs, called the operating sys-
tem, which supplies higher-level primitives than those of the machine language. 
These primitives provide system resource management, input and output oper-
ations, a file management system, text and/or program editors, and a variety of 
other commonly needed functions. Because language implementation systems 
need many of the operating system facilities, they interface with the operating 
system rather than directly with the processor (in machine language).

The operating system and language implementations are layered over the 
machine language interface of a computer. These layers can be thought of as 
virtual computers, providing interfaces to the user at higher levels. For exam-
ple, an operating system and a C compiler provide a virtual C computer. With 
other compilers, a machine can become other kinds of virtual computers. Most 
computer systems provide several different virtual computers. User programs 
form another layer over the top of the layer of virtual computers. The layered 
view of a computer is shown in Figure 1.2.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   22

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
1.7 

Implementation Methods 

  23

Figure 1.2

Layered interface of 
virtual computers,  
provided by a typical 
computer system

Virtual
VB .NET
computer

VB.NET
compiler

Virtual C# 
computer

. . .

C#
compiler

Virtual
C
computer

C
compiler

Java 
compiler

Virtual Java
computer

Java Virtual 
Machine

Scheme
interpreter

.NET
common
language
run time

Operating system

Macroinstruction
interpreter

Bare 
machine

Virtual 
Scheme 
computer

Operating
system
command
interpreter

Assembler

Ada
compiler

Virtual
Ada
computer

. . .

Virtual
assembly
language
computer

The implementation systems of the first high-level programming languages, 
constructed in the late 1950s, were among the most complex software systems 
of that time. In the 1960s, intensive research efforts were made to understand 
and formalize the process of constructing these high-level language implementa-
tions. The greatest success of those efforts was in the area of syntax analysis, pri-
marily because that part of the implementation process is an application of parts 
of automata theory and formal language theory that were then well understood.

1.7.1  Compilation

Programming languages can be implemented by any of three general methods. 
At one extreme, programs can be translated into machine language, which 
can be executed directly on the computer. This method is called a compiler 
implementation and has the advantage of very fast program execution, once 
the translation process is complete. Most production implementations of lan-
guages, such as C, COBOL, and C++, are by compilers.

The language that a compiler translates is called the source language. The 
process of compilation and program execution takes place in several phases, the 
most important of which are shown in Figure 1.3.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   23

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
24 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

Figure 1.3

The compilation process

Symbol
table

Source
program

Lexical
analyzer

Lexical units

Syntax
analyzer

Parse trees

Intermediate
code generator
and semantic
analyzer

Intermediate
code

Code
generator

Optimization
(optional)

Machine
language

Input data

Computer

Results

The lexical analyzer gathers the characters of the source program into 
 lexical  units.  The  lexical  units  of  a  program  are  identifiers,  special  words, 
 operators, and punctuation symbols. The lexical analyzer ignores comments 
in the source program because the compiler has no use for them.

The syntax analyzer takes the lexical units from the lexical analyzer and uses 
them to construct hierarchical structures called parse trees. These parse trees 
represent the syntactic structure of the program. In many cases, no actual parse 
tree structure is constructed; rather, the information that would be required to 

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   24

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
1.7 

Implementation Methods 

  25

build a tree is generated and used directly. Both lexical units and parse trees are 
discussed further in Chapter 3. Lexical analysis and syntax analysis, or parsing, 
are discussed in Chapter 4.

The  intermediate  code  generator  produces  a  program  in  a  different 
 language, at an intermediate level between the source program and the final 
output of the compiler: the machine language program.4 Intermediate  languages 
sometimes look very much like assembly languages, and in fact, sometimes are 
actual assembly languages. In other cases, the intermediate code is at a level 
somewhat higher than an assembly language. The semantic analyzer is an inte-
gral part of the intermediate code generator. The semantic analyzer checks for 
errors, such as type errors, that are difficult, if not impossible, to detect during 
syntax analysis.

Optimization, which improves programs (usually in their intermediate 
code version) by making them smaller or faster or both. Because many kinds 
of optimization are difficult to do on machine language, most optimization is 
done on the intermediate code.

The code generator translates the optimized intermediate code version of 

the program into an equivalent machine language program.

The symbol table serves as a database for the compilation process. The 
primary contents of the symbol table are the type and attribute information 
of each user-defined name in the program. This information is placed in the 
symbol table by the lexical and syntax analyzers and is used by the semantic 
analyzer and the code generator.

As stated previously, although the machine language generated by a com-
piler can be executed directly on the hardware, it must nearly always be run 
along with some other code. Most user programs also require programs from 
the operating system. Among the most common of these are programs for 
input and output. The compiler builds calls to required system programs when 
they are needed by the user program. Before the machine language programs 
produced  by  a  compiler  can  be  executed,  the  required  programs  from  the 
operating system must be found and linked to the user program. The linking 
operation connects the user program to the system programs by placing the 
addresses of the entry points of the system programs in the calls to them in the 
user program. The user and system code together are sometimes called a load 
module, or executable image. The process of collecting system programs and 
linking them to user programs is called linking and loading, or sometimes just 
 linking. It is accomplished by a systems program called a linker.

In addition to systems programs, user programs must often be linked to 
previously compiled programs that reside in libraries. So the linker not only 
links a given program to system programs, but also it may link it to other user 
or system-supplied programs.

The speed of the connection between a computer’s memory and its pro-
cessor often determines the speed of the computer, because instructions often 
can be executed faster than they can be moved to the processor for execution. 

4.  Note that the words program and code are often used interchangeably.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   25

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
26 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

This connection is called the von Neumann bottleneck; it is the primary 
limiting factor in the speed of von Neumann architecture computers. The von 
Neumann bottleneck has been one of the primary motivations for the research 
and development of parallel computers.

1.7.2  Pure Interpretation

Pure interpretation lies at the opposite end (from compilation) among imple-
mentation methods. With this approach, programs are interpreted by another 
program called an interpreter, with no translation whatever. The interpreter 
program acts as a software simulation of a machine whose fetch-execute cycle 
deals  with  high-level  language  program  statements  rather  than  machine 
instructions. This software simulation obviously provides a virtual machine 
for the language.

Pure interpretation has the advantage of allowing easy implementation of 
many source-level debugging operations, because all run-time error messages 
can refer to source-level units. For example, if an array index is found to be 
out of range, the error message can easily indicate the source line of the error 
and the name of the array. On the other hand, this method has the serious dis-
advantage that execution is 10 to 100 times slower than in compiled systems. 
The primary source of this slowness is the decoding of the high-level  language 
statements, which are far more complex than machine language instructions 
(although  there  may  be  fewer  statements  than  instructions  in  equivalent 
machine code). Furthermore, regardless of how many times a statement is 
executed, it must be decoded every time. Therefore, statement decoding, rather 
than the connection between the processor and memory, is the bottleneck of 
a pure interpreter.

Another disadvantage of pure interpretation is that it often requires more 
space. In addition to the source program, the symbol table must be present 
during interpretation. Furthermore, the source program may be stored in a 
form designed for easy access and modification rather than one that provides 
for minimal size.

Although  some  simple  early  languages  of  the  1960s  (APL,  SNOBOL 
(Griswold et al., 1971), and Lisp) were purely interpreted, by the 1980s, the 
approach was rarely used on high-level languages. However, in recent years, 
pure interpretation has made a significant comeback with some Web scripting 
languages, such as JavaScript and PHP, which are now widely used. The process 
of pure interpretation is shown in Figure 1.4.

1.7.3  Hybrid Implementation Systems

Some language implementation systems are a compromise between compilers 
and pure interpreters; they translate high-level language programs to an inter-
mediate language designed to allow easy interpretation. This method is faster 
than pure interpretation because the source language statements are decoded 
only once. Such implementations are called hybrid implementation systems.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   26

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
Figure 1.4

Pure interpretation

Source
program

1.7 

Implementation Methods 

  27

Input data

Interpreter

Results

The process used in a hybrid implementation system is shown in Figure 1.5. 
Instead of translating intermediate language code to machine code, it simply 
interprets the intermediate code.

Perl is implemented with a hybrid system. Perl programs are partially 
 compiled to detect errors before interpretation and to simplify the interpreter.
Initial implementations of Java were all hybrid. Its intermediate form, 
called byte code, provides portability to any machine that has a byte code 
interpreter and an associated run-time system. Together, these are called the 
Java Virtual Machine. There are now systems that translate Java byte code into 
machine code for faster execution.

A Just-in-Time (JIT) implementation system initially translates programs 
to an intermediate language. Then, during execution, it compiles intermediate 
language methods into machine code when they are called. The machine code 
version is kept for subsequent calls. JIT systems now are widely used for Java 
programs. Also, the .NET languages are all implemented with a JIT system.

Sometimes an implementor may provide both compiled and interpreted 
implementations for a language. In these cases, the interpreter is used to develop 
and debug programs. Then, after a (relatively) bug-free state is reached, the 
programs are compiled to increase their execution speed.

1.7.4  Preprocessors

A preprocessor is a program that processes a program just before the program 
is compiled. Preprocessor instructions are embedded in programs. The prepro-
cessor is essentially a macro expander. Preprocessor instructions are commonly 
used to specify that the code from another file is to be included. For example, 
the C preprocessor instruction

#include "myLib.h"

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   27

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
28 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

Figure 1.5

Hybrid implementation 
system

Source
program

Lexical
analyzer

Lexical units

Syntax
analyzer

Parse trees

Intermediate
code generator

Intermediate
code 

Input data

Interpreter

Results

causes the preprocessor to copy the contents of myLib.h into the program at 
the position of the #include.

Other preprocessor instructions are used to define symbols to represent 

expressions. For example, one could use

#define max(A, B) ((A) > (B) ? (A) : (B))

to determine the largest of two given expressions. For example, the expression

x = max(2 * y, z / 1.73);

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   28

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
1.8  Programming Environments 

  29

would be expanded by the preprocessor to

x = ((2 * y) > (z / 1.73) ? (2 * y) : (z / 1.73);

Notice that this is one of those cases where expression side effects can cause 
trouble.  For  example,  if  either  of  the  expressions  given  to  the  max  macro 
have  side  effects—such  as  z++—it  could  cause  a  problem.  Because  one  of 
the two expression parameters is evaluated twice, this could result in z being 
 incremented twice by the code produced by the macro expansion.

1.8  Programming Environments

A programming environment is the collection of tools used in the development 
of software. This collection may consist of only a file system, a text editor, a 
linker, and a compiler. Or it may include a large collection of integrated tools, 
each accessed through a uniform user interface. In the latter case, the process of 
the development and maintenance of software is greatly enhanced. Therefore, 
the characteristics of a programming language are not the only measure of the 
software development capability of a system. We now brief ly describe several 
programming environments.

UNIX  is  an  older  programming  environment,  first  distributed  in  the 
middle 1970s, built around a portable multiprogramming operating system. 
It provides a wide array of powerful support tools for software production and 
maintenance in a variety of languages. In the past, the most important feature 
absent from UNIX was a uniform interface among its tools. This made it more 
difficult to learn and to use. However, UNIX is now often used through a GUI 
that runs on top of UNIX. Examples of UNIX GUIs are the Solaris Common 
Desktop Environment (CDE), GNOME, and KDE. These GUIs make the 
interface to UNIX appear similar to that of Windows and Macintosh systems.
Borland JBuilder is a programming environment that provides an inte-
grated compiler, editor, debugger, and file system for Java development, where 
all four are accessed through a graphical interface. JBuilder is a complex and 
powerful system for creating Java software.

Microsoft Visual Studio .NET is a relatively recent step in the evolution 
of software development environments. It is a large and elaborate collection of 
software development tools, all used through a windowed interface. This sys-
tem can be used to develop software in any one of the five .NET languages: C#, 
Visual Basic.NET, JScript (Microsoft’s version of JavaScript), F# (a functional 
language), and C++/CLI.

NetBeans is a development environment that is primarily used for Java 
application development but also supports JavaScript, Ruby, and PHP. Both 
Visual Studio and NetBeans are more than development environments—they 
are also frameworks, which means they actually provide common parts of the 
code of the application.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   29

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
30 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

S U M M A R Y

The study of programming languages is valuable for some important reasons:  
It increases our capacity to use different constructs in writing programs, enables 
us to choose languages for projects more intelligently, and makes learning new 
languages easier.

Computers are used in a wide variety of problem-solving domains. The 
design and evaluation of a particular programming language is highly  dependent 
on the domain in which it is to be used.

Among the most important criteria for evaluating languages are readability, 
writability, reliability, and overall cost. These will be the basis on which we 
examine and judge the various language features discussed in the remainder 
of the book.

The major inf luences on language design have been machine architecture 

and software design methodologies.

Designing a programming language is primarily an engineering feat, in 
which a long list of trade-offs must be made among features, constructs, and 
capabilities.

The major methods of implementing programming languages are compi-

lation, pure interpretation, and hybrid implementation.

Programming  environments  have  become  important  parts  of  software 

development systems, in which the language is just one of the components.

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  Why is it useful for a programmer to have some background in language 
design, even though he or she may never actually design a programming 
language?

2.  How can knowledge of programming language characteristics benefit the 

whole computing community?

3.  What programming language has dominated scientific computing over 

the past 60 years?

4.  What programming language has dominated business applications over 

the past 60 years?

5.  What programming language has dominated artificial intelligence over 

the past 60 years?

6.  In what language is most of UNIX written?

7.  What is the disadvantage of having too many features in a language?

8.  How can user-defined operator overloading harm the readability of a 

program?

9.  What is one example of a lack of orthogonality in the design of C?

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   30

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
Problem Set 

  31

10.  What language used orthogonality as a primary design criterion?

11.  What primitive control statement is used to build more complicated 

control statements in languages that lack them?

12.  What does it mean for a program to be reliable?

13.  Why is type checking the parameters of a subprogram important?

14.  What is aliasing?

15.  What is exception handling?

16.  Why is readability important to writability?

17.  How is the cost of compilers for a given language related to the design of 

that language?

18.  What have been the strongest inf luences on programming language 

design over the past 60 years?

19.  What is the name of the category of programming languages 

whose structure is dictated by the von Neumann computer  
architecture?

20.  What two programming language deficiencies were discovered as a 

result of the research in software development in the 1970s?

21.  What are the three fundamental features of an object-oriented 

programming language?

22.  What language was the first to support the three fundamental features of 

object-oriented programming?

23.  What is an example of two language design criteria that are in direct 

conf lict with each other?

24.  What are the three general methods of implementing a programming 

language?

25.  Which produces faster program execution, a compiler or a pure 

interpreter?

26.  What role does the symbol table play in a compiler?

27.  What does a linker do?

28.  Why is the von Neumann bottleneck important?

29.  What are the advantages in implementing a language with a pure 

interpreter?

P R O B L E M   S E T

1.  Do you believe our capacity for abstract thought is inf luenced by our 

language skills? Support your opinion.

2.  What are some features of specific programming languages you know 

whose rationales are a mystery to you?

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   31

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
32 

  Chapter 1  

 Preliminaries

3.  What arguments can you make for the idea of a single language for all 

programming domains?

4.  What arguments can you make against the idea of a single language for 

all programming domains?

5.  Name and explain another criterion by which languages can be judged 

(in addition to those discussed in this chapter).

6.  What common programming language statement, in your opinion, is 

most detrimental to readability?

7.  Java uses a right brace to mark the end of all compound statements. 

What are the arguments for and against this design?

8.  Many languages distinguish between uppercase and lowercase letters in 
user-defined names. What are the pros and cons of this design decision?

9.  Explain the different aspects of the cost of a programming language.

10.  What are the arguments for writing efficient programs even though 

hardware is relatively inexpensive?

11.  Describe some design trade-offs between efficiency and safety in some 

language you know.

12.  In your opinion, what major features would a perfect programming 

language include?

13.  Was the first high-level programming language you learned 

implemented with a pure interpreter, a hybrid implementation system, 
or a compiler? (You may have to research this.)

14.  Describe the advantages and disadvantages of some programming 

environment you have used.

15.  How do type declaration statements for simple variables affect the 

readability of a language, considering that some languages do not require 
them?

16.  Write an evaluation of some programming language you know, using the 

criteria described in this chapter.

17.  Some programming languages—for example, Pascal—have used 

the semicolon to separate statements, while Java uses it to terminate 
statements. Which of these, in your opinion, is most natural and least 
likely to result in syntax errors? Support your answer.

18.  Many contemporary languages allow two kinds of comments: one in 

which delimiters are used on both ends (multiple-line comments), and 
one in which a delimiter marks only the beginning of the comment  
(one-line comments). Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each 
of these with respect to our criteria.

M01_SEBE8029_12_SE_C01.indd   32

1/5/18   11:10 PM

 
 
 
 
2 

Evolution of the Major 
Programming Languages

2.1  Zuse’s Plankalkül

2.2  Pseudocodes

2.3  The IBM 704 and Fortran

2.4  Functional Programming: Lisp

2.5  The First Step Toward Sophistication: ALGOL 60

2.6  Computerizing Business Records: COBOL

2.7  The Beginnings of Timesharing: Basic

2.8  Everything for Everybody: PL/I

2.9  Two Early Dynamic Languages: APL and SNOBOL

 2.10  The Beginnings of Data Abstraction: SIMULA 67

 2.11  Orthogonal Design: ALGOL 68

 2.12  Some Early Descendants of the ALGOLs

 2.13  Programming Based on Logic: Prolog

 2.14  History’s Largest Design Effort: Ada

 2.15  Object-Oriented Programming: Smalltalk

 2.16  Combining Imperative and Object-Oriented Features: C++

 2.17  An Imperative-Based Object-Oriented Language: Java

 2.18  Scripting Languages

 2.19  The Flagship .NET Language: C#

 2.20  Markup-Programming Hybrid Languages

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   33

1/5/18   11:11 PM

33

34 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

T his chapter describes the development of a collection of programming 

 languages. It explores the environment in which each was designed and focuses 
on the  contributions of the language and the motivation for its development. 
 Overall language descriptions are not included; rather, we discuss only some of the 
new  features introduced by each language. Of particular interest are the features that 
most influenced subsequent languages or the field of computer science.

This chapter does not include an in-depth discussion of any language feature or 

concept; that is left for later chapters. Brief, informal explanations of features will 
 suffice for our trek through the development of these languages.

We discuss a wide variety of languages and language concepts that will not be 
familiar to many readers. These topics are described in detail only in later chapters. 
Those who find this unsettling may prefer to delay reading this chapter until the rest of 
the book has been studied.

The choice as to which languages to discuss here was subjective, and some 
 readers will unhappily note the absence of one or more of their favorites. However, to 
keep this historical coverage to a reasonable size, it was necessary to leave out some 
languages that some regard highly. The choices were based on our estimate of each 
language’s importance to language development and the computing world as a whole. 
We also include brief discussions of some other languages that are referenced later in 
the book.

The organization of this chapter is as follows: The initial versions of languages 

generally are discussed in chronological order. However, subsequent versions of 
 languages appear with their initial version, rather than in later sections. For example, 
Fortran 2003 is discussed in the section with Fortran I (1956). Also, in some cases, 
 languages of secondary importance that are related to a language that has its own 
 section appear in that section.

This chapter includes listings of 14 complete example programs, each in a dif-
ferent language. These programs are not described in this chapter; they are meant to 
illustrate the appearance of programs in these languages. Readers familiar with any 
of the common imperative languages should be able to read and understand most of 
the code in these programs, except those in Lisp, COBOL, and Smalltalk. (A Scheme 
function similar to the Lisp example is discussed in Chapter 15.) The same problem is 
solved by the Fortran, ALGOL 60, PL/I, Basic, Pascal, C, Perl, Ada, Java, JavaScript, 
and C# programs. Note that most of the contemporary languages in this list support 
dynamic arrays, but because of the simplicity of the example problem, we did not use 
them in the example programs. Also, in the Fortran 95 program, we avoided using 
the features that could have avoided the use of loops altogether, in part to keep the 
program simple and readable and in part just to illustrate the basic loop structure of 
the language.

Figure 2.1 is a chart of the genealogy of the high-level languages discussed in this 

chapter.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   34

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages 

  35

FLOW-MATIC

APL

COBOL

LISP

Fortran I
Fortran II

Fortran IV

Prolog

Fortran 77

ALGOL 58

ALGOL 60

SIMULA I

BASIC

PL/I

ALGOL W

SIMULA 67
ALGOL 68

Pascal

MODULA-2

awk

Smalltalk 80

Ada 83

Objective-C

Perl

QuickBASIC

MODULA-3

Oberon

Fortran 90

Eiffel

Visual BASIC

SNOBOL

CPL

BCPL
B
C

Scheme

ML

ICON

Miranda

C++

COMMON LISP

Haskell

ANSI C (C89)

Python

Fortran 95

Lua

PHP

Ada 95

Ruby

Java

Javascript

Visual Basic.NET

C99

C#

Python 2.0

Fortran 2003

Ruby 1.8

Java 5.0

Ada 2005

Fortran 2008

Ruby 1.9

Ada 2012

Python 3.0

Java 6.0

Java 7.0

C# 2.0

C# 3.0

C# 4.0

C# 5.0

Fortran 2015

Java 8.0

Swift

1957
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
00
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15

Figure 2.1

Genealogy of common high-level programming languages

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   35

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
36 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

2.1  Zuse’s Plankalkül

The first programming language discussed in this chapter is highly unusual 
in several respects. For one thing, it was never implemented. Furthermore, 
although  developed  in  1945,  its  description  was  not  published  until  1972. 
Because so few people were familiar with the language, some of its capabilities 
did not appear in other languages until 15 years after its development.

2.1.1  Historical Background

Between 1936 and 1945, German scientist Konrad Zuse (pronounced “Tsoo-
zuh”) built a series of complex and sophisticated computers from electrome-
chanical relays. By early 1945, Allied bombing had destroyed all but one of his 
latest models, the Z4, so he moved to a remote Bavarian village, Hinterstein, 
and his research group members went their separate ways.

Working alone, Zuse embarked on an effort to develop a language for 
expressing computations for the Z4, a project he had begun in 1943 as a pro-
posal for his Ph.D. dissertation. He named this language Plankalkül, which 
means program calculus. In a lengthy manuscript dated 1945 but not published 
until 1972 (Zuse, 1972), Zuse defined Plankalkül and wrote algorithms in the 
language to solve a wide variety of problems.

2.1.2  Language Overview

Plankalkül was remarkably complete, with some of its most advanced features 
in the area of data structures. The simplest data type in Plankalkül was the sin-
gle bit. Integer and f loating-point numeric types were built from the bit type. 
The f loating-point type used twos-complement notation and the “hidden bit” 
scheme currently used to avoid storing the most significant bit of the normal-
ized fraction part of a f loating-point value.

In addition to the usual scalar types, Plankalkül included arrays and records 
(called structs in the C-based languages). The records could include nested 
records.

Although the language had no explicit goto, it did include an iterative state-
ment similar to the Ada for. It also had the command Fin with a superscript 
that specified an exit out of a given number of iteration loop nestings or to the 
beginning of a new iteration cycle. Plankalkül included a selection statement, 
but it did not allow an else clause.

One of the most interesting features of Zuse’s programs was the inclusion 
of mathematical expressions showing the current relationships between pro-
gram variables. These expressions stated what would be true during execution 
at the points in the code where they appeared. These are very similar to the 
assertions of Java and in those in axiomatic semantics, which is discussed in 
Chapter 3.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   36

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.2  Pseudocodes 

  37

Zuse’s manuscript contained programs of far greater complexity than any 
written prior to 1945. Included were programs to sort arrays of numbers; test 
the connectivity of a given graph; carry out integer and f loating-point opera-
tions, including square root; and perform syntax analysis on logic formulas that 
had parentheses and operators in six different levels of precedence. Perhaps 
most remarkable were his 49 pages of algorithms for playing chess, a game in 
which he was not an expert.

If a computer scientist had found Zuse’s description of Plankalkül in the 
early 1950s, the single aspect of the language that would have hindered its 
implementation as defined would have been the notation. Each statement con-
sisted of either two or three lines of code. The first line was most like the state-
ments of current languages. The second line, which was optional, contained the 
subscripts of the array references in the first line. The same method of indi-
cating subscripts was used by Charles Babbage in programs for his  Analytical 
Engine in the middle of the nineteenth century. The last line of each Plankalkül 
statement contained the type names for the variables mentioned in the first line. 
This notation is quite intimidating when first seen.

The following example assignment statement, which assigns the value of 
the expression A[4} + 1 to A[5], illustrates this notation. The row labeled V 
is for subscripts, and the row labeled S is for the data types. In this example, 
1.n means an integer of n bits:

  | A + 1 =>  A
V | 4         5
S | 1.n       1.n

We can only speculate on the direction that programming language design 
might have taken if Zuse’s work had been widely known in 1945 or even 1950. 
It is also interesting to consider how his work might have been different had he 
done it in a peaceful environment surrounded by other scientists, rather than 
in Germany in 1945 in virtual isolation.

2.2  Pseudocodes

First, note that the word pseudocode is used here in a different sense than its 
contemporary meaning. We call the languages discussed in this section pseudo-
codes because that’s what they were named at the time they were developed and 
used (the late 1940s and early 1950s). However, they are clearly not pseudo-
codes in the contemporary sense.

The computers that became available in the late 1940s and early 1950s 
were far less usable than those of today. In addition to being slow, unreliable, 
expensive, and having extremely small memories, the machines of that time 
were difficult to program because of the lack of supporting software.

There were no high-level programming languages or even assembly lan-
guages, so programming was done in machine code, which is both tedious and 

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   37

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
38 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

error prone. Among its problems is the use of numeric codes for specifying 
instructions. For example, an ADD instruction might be specified by the code 
14 rather than a connotative textual name, even if only a single letter. This 
makes programs very difficult to read. A more serious problem is absolute 
addressing, which makes program modification tedious and error prone. For 
example, suppose we have a machine language program stored in memory. 
Many of the instructions in such a program refer to other locations within 
the program, usually to reference data or to indicate the targets of branch 
instructions. Inserting an instruction at any position in the program other than 
at the end invalidates the correctness of all instructions that refer to addresses 
beyond the insertion point, because those addresses must be increased to make 
room for the new instruction. To make the addition correctly, all instructions 
that refer to addresses that follow the addition must be found and modified. 
A similar problem occurs with deletion of an instruction. In this case, however, 
machine languages often include a “no operation” instruction that can replace 
deleted instructions, thereby avoiding the problem.

These are standard problems with all machine languages and were the 
primary motivations for inventing assemblers and assembly languages. In addi-
tion, most programming problems of that time were numerical and required 
f loating-point arithmetic operations and indexing of some sort to allow the 
convenient use of arrays. Neither of these capabilities, however, was included in 
the architecture of the computers of the late 1940s and early 1950s. These defi-
ciencies naturally led to the development of somewhat higher-level languages.

2.2.1  Short Code

The first of these new languages, named Short Code, was developed by John 
Mauchly in 1949 for the BINAC computer, which was one of the first success-
ful stored-program electronic computers. Short Code was later transferred to 
a UNIVAC I computer (the first commercial electronic computer sold in the 
United States) and, for several years, was one of the primary means of pro-
gramming those machines. Although little is known of the original Short Code 
because its complete description was never published, a programming manual 
for the UNIVAC I version did survive (Remington-Rand, 1952). It is safe to 
assume that the two versions were very similar.

The words of the UNIVAC I’s memory had 72 bits, grouped as 12 six-bit 
bytes. Short Code consisted of coded versions of mathematical expressions that 
were to be evaluated. The codes were byte-pair values, and many equations 
could be coded in a word. The following operation codes were included:

01 -    06 abs value     1n (n+2)nd power
02 )    07 +             2n (n+2)nd root
03 =    08 pause         4n if <= n
04 /    09 (             58 print and tab

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   38

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.2  Pseudocodes 

  39

Variables were named with byte-pair codes, as were locations to be used as 
constants. For example, X0 and Y0 could be variables. The statement

X0 = SQRT(ABS(Y0))

would be coded in a word as 00  X0  03  20  06  Y0. The initial 00 was used 
as padding to fill the word. Interestingly, there was no multiplication code; 
multiplication was indicated by simply placing the two operands next to each 
other, as in algebra.

Short Code was not translated to machine code; rather, it was implemented 
with a pure interpreter. At the time, this process was called automatic program-
ming. It clearly simplified the programming process, but at the expense of 
execution time. Short Code interpretation was approximately 50 times slower 
than machine code.

2.2.2  Speedcoding

In  other  places,  interpretive  systems  were  being  developed  that  extended 
machine languages to include f loating-point operations. The Speedcoding 
system developed by John Backus for the IBM 701 is an example of such a 
system (Backus, 1954). The Speedcoding interpreter effectively converted the 
701 to a virtual three-address f loating-point calculator. The system included 
pseudoinstructions for the four arithmetic operations on f loating-point data, 
as well as operations such as square root, sine, arc tangent, exponent, and loga-
rithm. Conditional and unconditional branches and input/output conversions 
were also part of the virtual architecture. To get an idea of the limitations of 
such systems, consider that the remaining usable memory after loading the 
interpreter was only 700 words and that the add instruction took 4.2 millisec-
onds to execute. On the other hand, Speedcoding included the novel facility 
of automatically incrementing address registers. This facility did not appear in 
hardware until the UNIVAC 1107 computers of 1962. Because of such features, 
matrix multiplication could be done in 12 Speedcoding instructions. Backus 
claimed that problems that could take two weeks to program in machine code 
could be programmed in a few hours using Speedcoding.

2.2.3  The UNIVAC “Compiling” System

Between 1951 and 1953, a team led by Grace Hopper at UNIVAC developed a 
series of “compiling” systems named A-0, A-1, and A-2 that expanded a pseudo-
code into machine code subprograms in the same way as macros are expanded 
into assembly language. The pseudocode source for these “compilers” was still 
quite primitive, although even this was a great improvement over machine code 
because it made source programs much shorter. Wilkes (1952) independently 
suggested a similar process.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   39

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
40 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

2.2.4  Related Work

Other means of easing the task of programming were being developed at about 
the same time. At Cambridge University, David J. Wheeler (1950) developed 
a method of using blocks of relocatable addresses to solve, at least partially, the 
problem of absolute addressing, and later, Maurice V. Wilkes (also at Cam-
bridge) extended the idea to design an assembly program that could combine 
chosen subroutines and allocate storage (Wilkes et al., 1951, 1957). This was 
indeed an important and fundamental advance.

We should also mention that assembly languages, which are quite different 
from the pseudocodes discussed, evolved during the early 1950s. However, they 
had little impact on the design of high-level languages.

2.3  The IBM 704 and Fortran

Certainly  one  of  the  greatest  single  advances  in  computing  came  with  the 
introduction of the IBM 704 in 1954, in large measure because its capabilities 
prompted the development of Fortran. One could argue that if it had not been 
IBM with the 704 and Fortran, it would soon thereafter have been some other 
organization with a similar computer and related high-level language. How-
ever, IBM was the first with both the foresight and the resources to undertake 
these developments.

2.3.1  Historical Background

One of the primary reasons why the slowness of interpretive systems was tol-
erated from the late 1940s to the mid-1950s was the lack of f loating-point 
hardware in the available computers. All f loating-point operations had to be 
simulated in software, a very time-consuming process. Because so much pro-
cessor time was spent in software f loating-point processing, the overhead of 
interpretation and the simulation of indexing were relatively insignificant. As 
long as f loating-point had to be done by software, interpretation was an accept-
able expense. However, many programmers of that time never used interpre-
tive systems, preferring the efficiency of hand-coded machine (or assembly) 
language. The announcement of the IBM 704 system, with both indexing and 
f loating-point instructions in hardware, heralded the end of the interpretive 
era, at least for scientific computation. The inclusion of f loating-point hard-
ware removed the hiding place for the cost of interpretation.

Although Fortran is often credited with being the first compiled high-level 
language, the question of who deserves credit for implementing the first such 
language is somewhat open. Knuth and Pardo (1977) give the credit to Alick 
E. Glennie for his Autocode compiler for the Manchester Mark I computer. 
Glennie developed the compiler at Fort Halstead, Royal Armaments Research 
Establishment,  in  England.  The  compiler  was  operational  by   September 
1952. However, according to John Backus (Wexelblat, 1981, p. 26), Glennie’s 

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   40

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.3  The IBM 704 and Fortran 

  41

Autocode was so low level and machine oriented that it should not be consid-
ered a compiled system. Backus gives the credit to Laning and Zierler at the 
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

The Laning and Zierler system (Laning and Zierler, 1954) was the first 
algebraic translation system to be implemented. By algebraic, we mean that it 
translated arithmetic expressions, used separately coded subprograms to com-
pute transcendental functions (e.g., sine and logarithm), and included arrays. 
The system was implemented on the MIT Whirlwind computer, in experi-
mental prototype form, in the summer of 1952 and in a more usable form by 
May 1953. The translator generated a subroutine call to code each formula, 
or expression, in the program. The source language was easy to read, and the 
only actual machine instructions included were for branching. Although this 
work preceded the work on Fortran, it never escaped MIT.

In spite of these earlier works, the first widely accepted compiled high-
level language was Fortran. The following subsections chronicle this important 
development.

2.3.2  Design Process

Even before the 704 system was announced in May 1954, plans were begun for 
Fortran. By November 1954, John Backus and his group at IBM had produced 
the report titled “The IBM Mathematical FORmula TRANslating System: 
FORTRAN” (IBM, 1954). This document described the first version of For-
tran, which we refer to as Fortran 0, prior to its implementation. It also boldly 
stated that Fortran would provide the efficiency of hand-coded programs and 
the ease of programming of the interpretive pseudocode systems. In another 
burst of optimism, the document stated that Fortran would eliminate coding 
errors and the debugging process. Based on this premise, the first Fortran 
compiler included little syntax error checking.

The environment in which Fortran was developed was as follows: (1) Com-
puters had small memories and were slow and relatively unreliable; (2) the 
primary use of computers was for scientific computations; (3) there were no 
existing efficient and effective ways to program computers; and (4) because of 
the high cost of computers compared to the cost of programmers, speed of the 
generated object code was the primary goal of the first Fortran compilers. 
The characteristics of the early versions of Fortran follow directly from this 
environment.

2.3.3  Fortran I Overview

Fortran 0 was modified during the implementation period, which began in 
January 1955 and continued until the release of the compiler in April 1957. The 
implemented language, which we call Fortran I, is described in the first Fortran 
Programmer’s Reference Manual, published in October 1956 (IBM, 1956). For-
tran I included input/output formatting, variable names of up to six characters 
(it had been just two in Fortran 0), user-defined subroutines, although they 

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   41

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
42 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

could not be separately compiled, the If selection statement, and the Do loop 
statement.

All of Fortran I’s control statements were based on 704 instructions. It is 
not clear whether the 704 designers dictated the control statement design of 
Fortran I or whether the designers of Fortran I suggested these instructions 
to the 704 designers.

There were no data-typing statements in the Fortran I language. Variables 
whose names began with I, J, K, L, M, and N were implicitly integer type, and all 
others were implicitly f loating-point. The choice of the letters for this conven-
tion was based on the fact that at that time scientists and engineers used letters 
as variable subscripts, usually i, j, and k. In a gesture of generosity, Fortran’s 
designers threw in the three additional letters.

The most audacious claim made by the Fortran development group during 
the design of the language was that the machine code produced by the compiler 
would be about half as efficient as what could be produced by hand.1 This, more 
than anything else, made skeptics of potential users and prevented a great deal 
of interest in Fortran before its actual release. To almost everyone’s surprise, 
however, the Fortran development group nearly achieved its goal in efficiency. 
The largest part of the 18 worker-years of effort used to construct the first com-
piler had been spent on optimization, and the results were remarkably effective.
The early success of Fortran is shown by the results of a survey made in 
April 1958. At that time, roughly half of the code being written for 704s was 
being written in Fortran, in spite of the skepticism of most of the programming 
world only a year earlier.

2.3.4  Fortran II

The Fortran II compiler was distributed in the spring of 1958. It fixed many 
of the bugs in the Fortran I compilation system and added some significant 
features  to  the  language,  the  most  important  being  the  independent  com-
pilation of subroutines. Without independent compilation, any change in a 
program required that the entire program be recompiled. Fortran I’s lack of 
independent-compilation capability, coupled with the poor reliability of the 
704, placed a practical restriction on the length of programs to about 300 to 
400 lines (Wexelblat, 1981, p. 68). Longer programs had a poor chance of 
being compiled completely before a machine failure occurred. The capability 
of including precompiled machine language versions of subprograms shortened 
the compilation process considerably and made it practical to develop much 
larger programs.

1.  In fact, the Fortran team believed that the code generated by their compiler could be no 

less than half as fast as handwritten machine code, or the language would not be adopted by 
users.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   42

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2.3.5  Fortrans IV, 77, 90, 95, 2003, and 2008

2.3  The IBM 704 and Fortran 

  43

A Fortran III was developed, but it was never widely distributed. Fortran IV, 
however, became one of the most widely used programming languages of its 
time. It evolved over the period 1960 to 1962 and was standardized as For-
tran 66 (ANSI, 1966), although that name was rarely used. Fortran IV was 
an improvement over Fortran II in many ways. Among its most important 
additions were explicit type declarations for variables, a logical If construct, 
and the capability of passing subprograms as parameters to other subprograms.
Fortran IV was replaced by Fortran 77, which became the new standard 
in 1978 (ANSI, 1978a). Fortran 77 retained most of the features of Fortran IV 
and added character string handling, logical loop control statements, and an 
If with an optional Else clause.

Fortran 90 (ANSI, 1992) was dramatically different from Fortran 77. The 
most significant additions were dynamic arrays, records, pointers, a multiple 
selection statement, and modules. In addition, Fortran 90 subprograms could 
be recursively called.

A new concept that was included in the Fortran 90 definition was that of 
removing some language features from earlier versions. While Fortran 90 included 
all of the features of Fortran 77, the language definition included a list of con-
structs that were recommended for removal in the next version of the language.

Fortran 90 included two simple syntactic changes that altered the appearance 
of both programs and the literature describing the language. First, the required 
fixed format of code, which required the use of specific character positions for spe-
cific parts of statements, was dropped. For example, statement labels could appear 
only in the first five positions and statements could not begin before the seventh 
position. This rigid formatting of code was designed around the use of punch cards. 
The second change was that the official spelling of FORTRAN became Fortran. 
This change was accompanied by the change in convention of using all uppercase 
letters for keywords and identifiers in Fortran programs. The new convention was 
that only the first letter of keywords and identifiers would be uppercase.

Fortran 95 (INCITS/ISO/IEC, 1997) continued the evolution of the lan-
guage, but only a few changes were made. Among other things, a new iteration 
construct, Forall, was added to ease the task of parallelizing Fortran programs.
Fortran 2003 (Metcalf et al., 2004) added support for object-oriented pro-
gramming, parameterized derived types, procedure pointers, and interopera-
bility with the C programming language.

The  latest  version  of  Fortran,  Fortran  2008  (ISO/IEC  1539-1,  2010), 
added support for blocks to define local scopes, co-arrays, which provide a 
parallel execution model, and the DO CONCURRENT construct, to specify loops 
without interdependencies. A new version, Fortran 2015, is under development 
and is scheduled for release in 2018.

2.3.6  Evaluation

The original Fortran design team thought of language design only as a nec-
essary prelude to the critical task of designing the translator. Furthermore, 
it  never  occurred  to  them  that  Fortran  would  be  used  on  computers  not 

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   43

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
44 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

manufactured by IBM. However, they were forced to consider building For-
tran compilers for other IBM machines only because the successor to the 704, 
the 709, was announced before the 704 Fortran compiler was released. The 
effect that Fortran has had on the use of computers, along with the fact that all 
 subsequent programming languages owe a debt to Fortran, is indeed impressive 
in light of the modest goals of its designers.

One of the features of Fortran I, and all of its successors before 90, that allows 
highly optimizing compilers was that the types and storage for all  variables are 
fixed before run time. No new variables or space could be allocated during exe-
cution. This was a sacrifice of f lexibility to simplicity and efficiency. It eliminated 
the possibility of recursive subprograms and made it difficult to implement data 
structures that grow or change shape dynamically. Of course, the kinds of pro-
grams that were being built at the time of the development of the early versions 
of Fortran were primarily numerical in nature and were simple in comparison 
with more recent software projects. Therefore, the sacrifice was not a great one.
The  overall  success  of  Fortran  is  difficult  to  overstate:  It  dramatically 
changed the way computers are used. This is, of course, in large part due to its 
being the first widely used high-level language. In comparison with concepts 
and languages developed later, early versions of Fortran suffer in a variety 
of ways, as should be expected. After all, it would not be fair to compare the 
performance and comfort of a 1910 Model T Ford with the performance and 
comfort of a 2017 Ford Mustang. Nevertheless, in spite of the inadequacies of 
Fortran, the momentum of the huge investment in Fortran software, among 
other factors, has kept it in use for 60 years.

Alan Perlis, one of the designers of ALGOL 60, said of Fortran in 1978, 
“Fortran is the lingua franca of the computing world. It is the language of the 
streets in the best sense of the word, not in the prostitutional sense of the word. 
And it has survived and will survive because it has turned out to be a remarkably 
useful part of a very vital commerce” (Wexelblat, 1981, p. 161).
The following is an example of a Fortran 95 program:

! Fortran 95 Example program
!  Input:   An integer, List_Len, where List_Len is less
!           than 100, followed by List_Len-Integer values
!  Output:  The number of input values that are greater
!           than the average of all input values
Implicit none
Integer Dimension(99) :: Int_List
Integer :: List_Len, Counter, Sum, Average, Result
Result= 0
Sum = 0
Read *, List_Len
If ((List_Len > 0) .AND. (List_Len < 100)) Then
! Read input data into an array and compute its sum
   Do Counter = 1, List_Len
      Read *, Int_List(Counter)
      Sum = Sum + Int_List(Counter)
   End Do

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   44

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.4  Functional Programming: Lisp 

  45

! Compute the average
   Average = Sum / List_Len
! Count the values that are greater than the average
   Do Counter = 1, List_Len
      If (Int_List(Counter) > Average) Then
           Result = Result + 1
      End If
   End Do
! Print the result
   Print *, 'Number of values > Average is:', Result
Else
   Print *, 'Error - list length value is not legal'
End If
End Program Example

2.4  Functional Programming: Lisp

The first functional programming language was invented to provide language 
features for list processing, the need for which grew out of the first applications 
in the area of artificial intelligence (AI).

2.4.1 

 The Beginnings of Artificial Intelligence (AI)  
and List Processing

Interest  in  AI  appeared  in  the  mid-1950s  in  a  number  of  places.  Some  of 
this interest grew out of linguistics, some from psychology, and some from 
mathematics.  Linguists  were  concerned  with  natural  language  processing. 
 Psychologists were interested in modeling human information storage and 
retrieval, as well as other fundamental processes of the brain. Mathematicians 
were interested in mechanizing certain intelligent processes, such as theo-
rem proving. All of these investigations arrived at the same conclusion: Some 
method must be developed to allow computers to process symbolic data in 
linked lists. At the time, nearly all computation was on numeric data in arrays.
The concept of list processing was developed by Allen Newell, J. C. Shaw, 
and Herbert Simon at the RAND Corporation. It was first published in a clas-
sic paper that describes one of the first AI programs, the Logic Theorist,2 and 
a language in which it could be implemented (Newell and Simon, 1956). The 
language, named IPL-I (Information Processing Language I), was never imple-
mented. The next version, IPL-II, was implemented on a RAND Johnniac 
computer. Development of IPL continued until 1960, when the description 
of IPL-V was published (Newell and Tonge, 1960). The low level of the IPL 
languages prevented their widespread use. They were actually assembly lan-
guages for a hypothetical computer, implemented with an interpreter, in which 

2.  Logic Theorist discovered proofs for theorems in propositional calculus.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   45

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
46 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

list-processing instructions were included. Another factor that kept the IPL 
languages from becoming popular was their implementation on the obscure 
Johnniac machine.

The contributions of the IPL languages were in their list design and their 

demonstration that list processing was feasible and useful.

IBM became interested in AI in the mid-1950s and chose theorem prov-
ing as a demonstration area. At the time, the Fortran project was still under-
way. The high cost of the Fortran I compiler convinced IBM that their list 
processing should be attached to Fortran, rather than in the form of a new 
language. Thus, the Fortran list processing language (FLPL) was designed 
and implemented as an extension to Fortran. FLPL was used to construct a 
theorem prover for plane geometry, which was then considered the easiest area 
for mechanical theorem proving.

2.4.2  Lisp Design Process

John  McCarthy  of  MIT  took  a  summer  position  at  the  IBM  Information 
Research Department in 1958. His goal for the summer was to investigate 
symbolic computations and to develop a set of requirements for doing such 
computations. As a pilot example problem area, he chose differentiation of 
algebraic expressions. From this study came a list of language requirements. 
Among them were the control f low methods of mathematical functions: recur-
sion and conditional expressions. The only available high-level language of the 
time, Fortran I, had neither of these.

Another requirement that grew from the symbolic-differentiation inves-
tigation was the need for dynamically allocated linked lists and some kind of 
implicit deallocation of abandoned lists. McCarthy simply would not allow his 
elegant algorithm for differentiation to be cluttered with explicit deallocation 
statements.

Because FLPL did not support recursion, conditional expressions, dynamic 
storage allocation, or implicit deallocation, it was clear to McCarthy that a new 
language was needed.

When McCarthy returned to MIT in the fall of 1958, he and Marvin Min-
sky formed the MIT AI Project, with funding from the Research Laboratory 
for Electronics at MIT. The first important effort of the project was to produce 
a software system for list processing. It was to be used initially to implement 
a program proposed by McCarthy called the Advice Taker.3 This application 
became the impetus for the development of the list-processing language Lisp. 
The first version of Lisp is sometimes called “pure Lisp” because it is a purely 
functional language. In the following section, we describe the development of 
pure Lisp.

3.  Advice Taker represented information with sentences written in a formal language and used 

a logical inferencing process to decide what to do.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   46

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2.4  Functional Programming: Lisp 

  47

2.4.3  Language Overview

2.4.3.1  Data Structures

Pure Lisp has only two kinds of data structures: atoms and lists. Atoms are 
either symbols, which have the form of identifiers, or numeric literals. The con-
cept of storing symbolic information in linked lists is natural and was used in 
IPL-II. Such structures allow insertions and deletions at any point, operations 
that were then thought to be a necessary part of list processing. It was eventu-
ally determined, however, that Lisp programs rarely require these operations.
Lists are specified by delimiting their elements with parentheses. Simple 

lists, in which elements are restricted to atoms, have the form

(A B C D)

Nested list structures are also specified by parentheses. For example, the list

(A (B C) D (E (F G)))

is composed of four elements. The first is the atom A; the second is the sublist 
(B C); the third is the atom D; the fourth is the sublist (E (F G)), which has 
as its second element the sublist (F G).

Internally, lists are stored as single-linked list structures, in which each 
node has two pointers and represents a list element. A node containing an 
atom has its first pointer pointing to some representation of the atom, such 
as its symbol or numeric value, or a pointer to a sublist. A node for a sublist 
element has its first pointer pointing to the first node of the sublist. In both 
cases, the second pointer of a node points to the next element of the list. A list 
is referenced by a pointer to its first element.

The internal representations of the two lists shown earlier are depicted in 
Figure 2.2. Note that the elements of a list are shown horizontally. The last 
element of a list has no successor, so its link is NIL, which is represented in 
Figure 2.2 as a diagonal line in the element. Sublists are shown with the same 
structure.

2.4.3.2  Processes in Functional Programming

Lisp was designed as a functional programming language. All computation in a 
purely functional program is accomplished by applying functions to arguments. 
Neither the assignment statements nor the variables that abound in imperative 
language programs are necessary in functional language programs. Further-
more, repetitive processes can be specified with recursive function calls, making 
iteration (loops) unnecessary. These basic concepts of functional programming 
make it significantly different from programming in an imperative language.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   47

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
48 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

Figure 2.2

Internal representation 
of two Lisp lists

A

A

B

B

C

D

C

D

E

F

G

2.4.3.3  The Syntax of Lisp

Lisp is very different from the imperative languages, both because it is a func-
tional programming language and because the appearance of Lisp programs is 
so different from those in languages like Java or C++. For example, the syntax 
of Java is a complicated mixture of English and algebra, while Lisp’s syntax 
is a model of simplicity. Program code and data have exactly the same form: 
parenthesized lists. Consider again the list

(A B C D)

When interpreted as data, it is a list of four elements. When viewed as code, it 
is the application of the function named A to the three parameters B, C, and D.

2.4.4  Evaluation

Lisp completely dominated AI applications for a quarter century. Much of 
the cause of Lisp’s reputation for being highly inefficient has been eliminated. 
Many contemporary implementations are compiled, and the resulting code is 
much faster than running the source code on an interpreter. In addition to its 
success in AI, Lisp pioneered functional programming, which has proven to 
be a lively area of research in programming languages. As stated in Chapter 1, 
many programming language researchers believe functional programming is a 
much better approach to software development than procedural programming 
using imperative languages.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   48

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.4  Functional Programming: Lisp 

  49

The following is an example of a Lisp program:

; Lisp Example function
; The following code defines a Lisp predicate function
; that takes two lists as arguments and returns True
; if the two lists are equal, and NIL (false) otherwise
  (DEFUN equal_lists (lis1 lis2)
   (COND
     ((ATOM lis1) (EQ lis1 lis2))
     ((ATOM lis2) NIL)
     ((equal_lists (CAR lis1) (CAR lis2))
                   (equal_lists (CDR lis1) (CDR lis2)))
     (T NIL)
   )
)

2.4.5  Two Descendants of Lisp

Two dialects of Lisp are now widely used, Scheme and Common Lisp. These 
are brief ly discussed in the following subsections.

2.4.5.1  Scheme

The Scheme language emerged from MIT in the mid-1970s. It is characterized 
by its small size, its exclusive use of static scoping (discussed in Chapter 5), and 
its treatment of functions as first-class entities. As first-class entities, Scheme 
functions can be assigned to variables, passed as parameters, and returned as 
the values of function applications. They can also be the elements of lists. Early 
versions of Lisp did not provide all of these capabilities, nor did they use static 
scoping.

As a small language with simple syntax and semantics, Scheme is well suited 
to educational applications, such as courses in functional programming and 
general introductions to programming. Scheme is described in some detail in 
Chapter 15.

2.4.5.2  Common Lisp

During the 1970s and early 1980s, a large number of different dialects of Lisp 
were developed and used. This led to the familiar problem of lack of portabil-
ity among programs written in the various dialects. Common Lisp  (Graham, 
1996) was created  in an effort  to rectify  this  situation.  Common  Lisp was 
designed by combining the features of several dialects of Lisp developed in the 
early 1980s, including Scheme, into a single language. Being such an amalgam, 
Common Lisp is a relatively large and complex language. Its basis, however, 
is pure Lisp, so its syntax, primitive functions, and fundamental nature come 
from that language.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   49

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
50 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

Recognizing the f lexibility provided by dynamic scoping as well as the 
simplicity of static scoping, Common Lisp allows both. The default scoping 
for variables is static, but by declaring a variable to be special, that variable 
becomes dynamically scoped.

Common Lisp has a large number of data types and structures, including 
records, arrays, complex numbers, and character strings. It also has a form of 
packages for modularizing collections of functions and data providing access 
control.

Common Lisp is further described in Chapter 15.

2.4.6  Related Languages

ML (MetaLanguage; Ullman, 1998) was originally designed in the 1980s by 
Robin Milner at the University of Edinburgh as a metalanguage for a program 
verification system named Logic for Computable Functions (LCF; Milner 
et al., 1997). ML is primarily a functional language, but it also supports imper-
ative programming. Unlike Lisp and Scheme, the type of every variable and 
expression in ML can be determined at compile time. Types are associated with 
objects rather than names. Types of names and expressions are inferred from 
their context.

Unlike Lisp and Scheme, ML does not use the parenthesized functional 
syntax  that  originated  with  lambda  expressions.  Rather,  the  syntax  of  ML 
resembles that of the imperative languages, such as Java and C++.

Miranda was developed by David Turner (1986) at the University of Kent 
in Canterbury, England, in the early 1980s. Miranda is based partly on the 
languages ML, SASL, and KRC. Haskell (Hudak and Fasel, 1992) is based in 
large part on Miranda. Like Miranda, it is a purely functional language, having 
no variables and no assignment statement. Another distinguishing character-
istic of Haskell is its use of lazy evaluation. This means that no expression is 
evaluated until its value is required. This leads to some surprising capabilities 
in the language.

Caml (Cousineau et al., 1998) and its dialect that supports object-oriented 
programming, OCaml (Smith, 2006), descended from ML and Haskell. Finally, 
F# is a relatively new typed language based directly on OCaml. F# (Syme et al., 
2010) is a .NET language with direct access to the whole .NET library. Being a 
.NET language also means it can smoothly interoperate with any other .NET 
language. F# supports both functional programming and procedural program-
ming. It also fully supports object-oriented programming.

ML, Haskell, and F# are further discussed in Chapter 15.

2.5  The First Step Toward Sophistication: ALGOL 60

ALGOL 60 strongly inf luenced subsequent programming languages and is 
therefore of central importance in any historical study of languages.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   50

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.5  The First Step Toward Sophistication: ALGOL 60 

  51

2.5.1  Historical Background

ALGOL 60 was the result of efforts to design a universal programming language 
for scientific applications. By late 1954, the Laning and Zierler algebraic system 
had been in operation for over a year, and the first report on Fortran had been 
published. Fortran became a reality in 1957, and several other high-level languages 
were being developed. Most notable among them were IT, which was designed 
by Alan Perlis at Carnegie Tech, and two languages for the UNIVAC computers, 
MATH-MATIC and UNICODE. The proliferation of languages made program 
sharing among users difficult. Furthermore, the new languages were all grow-
ing up around single architectures, some for UNIVAC computers and some for 
IBM 700-series machines. In response to this blossoming of machine-dependent 
languages, several major computer user groups in the United States, including 
SHARE (the IBM scientific user group) and USE (UNIVAC Scientific Exchange, 
the large-scale UNIVAC scientific user group), submitted a petition to the Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery (ACM) on May 10, 1957, to form a committee 
to study and recommend action to create a machine-independent scientific pro-
gramming language. Although Fortran might have been a candidate, it could not 
become a universal language, because at the time it was solely owned by IBM.

Previously, in 1955, GAMM (a German acronym for Society for Applied 
Mathematics and Mechanics) had formed a committee to design one universal, 
machine-independent algorithmic language. The desire for this new language 
was in part due to the Europeans’ fear of being dominated by IBM. By late 
1957, however, the appearance of several high-level languages in the United 
States convinced the GAMM subcommittee that their effort had to be widened 
to include the Americans, and a letter of invitation was sent to ACM. In April 
1958, after Fritz Bauer of GAMM presented the formal proposal to ACM, the 
two groups officially agreed to a joint language design project.

2.5.2  Early Design Process

GAMM and ACM each sent four members to the first design meeting. The 
meeting, which was held in Zurich from May 27 to June 1, 1958, began with 
the following goals for the new language:

•  The syntax of the language should be as close as possible to standard math-
ematical notation, and programs written in it should be readable with little 
further explanation.

•  It should be possible to use the language for the description of algorithms 

in printed publications.

•  Programs  in  the  new  language  must  be  mechanically  translatable  into 

machine language.

The first goal indicated that the new language was to be used for scientific 
programming, which was the primary computer application area at that time. 
The second was something entirely new to the computing business. The last 
goal is an obvious necessity for any programming language.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   51

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
52 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

The Zurich meeting succeeded in producing a language that met the stated 
goals, but the design process required innumerable compromises, both among 
individuals and between the two sides of the Atlantic. In some cases, the com-
promises were  not so much  over  great issues as they  were over spheres  of 
inf luence. The question of whether to use a comma (the European method) or 
a period (the American method) for a decimal point is one example.

2.5.3  ALGOL 58 Overview

The language designed at the Zurich meeting was named the International 
Algorithmic Language (IAL). It was suggested during the design that the lan-
guage be named ALGOL, for ALGOrithmic Language, but the name was 
rejected because it did not ref lect the international scope of the committee. 
During the following year, however, the name was changed to ALGOL, and 
the language subsequently became known as ALGOL 58.

In many ways, ALGOL 58 was a descendant of Fortran, which is quite nat-
ural. It generalized many of Fortran’s features and added several new constructs 
and concepts. Some of the generalizations had to do with the goal of not tying 
the language to any particular machine, and others were attempts to make the 
language more f lexible and powerful. A rare combination of simplicity and 
elegance emerged from the effort.

ALGOL 58 formalized the concept of data type, although only variables 
that were not f loating-point required explicit declaration. It added the idea of 
compound statements, which most subsequent languages incorporated. Some 
features of Fortran that were generalized were the following: Identifiers were 
allowed to have any length, as opposed to Fortran I’s restriction to six or fewer 
characters; any number of array dimensions was allowed, unlike Fortran I’s 
limitation to no more than three; the lower bound of arrays could be specified 
by the programmer, whereas in Fortran it was implicitly 1; nested selection 
statements were allowed, which was not the case in Fortran I.

ALGOL 58 acquired the assignment operator in a rather unusual way. 

Zuse used the form

expression =7 variable

for the assignment statement in Plankalkül. Although Plankalkül had not yet 
been published, some of the European members of the ALGOL 58 committee 
were familiar with the language. The committee dabbled with the Plankalkül 
assignment form but, because of arguments about character set limitations,4 
the greater-than symbol was changed to a colon. Then, largely at the insistence 
of the Americans, the whole statement was turned around to the Fortran form

variable := expression

The Europeans preferred the opposite form, but that would be the reverse of 
Fortran.

4.  The card punches of that time did not include the greater-than symbol.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   52

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2.5  The First Step Toward Sophistication: ALGOL 60 

  53

2.5.4  Reception of the ALGOL 58 Report

In December 1958, publication of the ALGOL 58 report (Perlis and Samelson, 
1958) was greeted with enthusiasm. In the United States, the new language was 
viewed more as a collection of ideas for programming language design than as 
a universal standard language. Actually, the ALGOL 58 report was not meant 
to be a finished product but rather a preliminary document for international 
discussion. Nevertheless, three major design and implementation efforts used 
the report as their basis. At the University of Michigan, the MAD language 
was born (Arden et al., 1961). The U.S. Naval Electronics Group produced 
the NELIAC language (Huskey et al., 1963). At System Development Cor-
poration, JOVIAL was designed and implemented (Shaw, 1963). JOVIAL, an 
acronym for Jules’ Own Version of the International Algebraic Language, rep-
resents the only language based on ALGOL 58 to achieve widespread use (Jules 
was Jules I. Schwartz, one of JOVIAL’s designers). JOVIAL became widely 
used because it was the official scientific language for the U.S. Air Force for a 
quarter century.

The rest of the U.S. computing community was not so kind to the new lan-
guage. At first, both IBM and its major scientific user group, SHARE, seemed 
to embrace ALGOL 58. IBM began an implementation shortly after the report 
was published, and SHARE formed a subcommittee, SHARE IAL, to study the 
language. The subcommittee subsequently recommended that ACM standard-
ize ALGOL 58 and that IBM implement it for all of the 700-series computers. 
The enthusiasm was short-lived, however. By the spring of 1959, both IBM 
and SHARE, through their Fortran experience, had had enough of the pain 
and expense of getting a new language started, both in terms of developing and 
using the first-generation compilers and in terms of training users in the new 
language and persuading them to use it. By the middle of 1959, both IBM and 
SHARE had developed such a vested interest in Fortran that they decided to 
retain it as the scientific language for the IBM 700-series machines, thereby 
abandoning ALGOL 58.

2.5.5  ALGOL 60 Design Process

During 1959, ALGOL 58 was furiously debated in both Europe and the United 
States. Large numbers of suggested modifications and additions were published 
in the European ALGOL Bulletin and in Communications of the ACM. One of the 
most important events of 1959 was the presentation of the work of the Zurich 
committee to the International Conference on Information Processing, for 
there Backus introduced his new notation for describing the syntax of program-
ming languages, which later became known as BNF (Backus-Naur form). BNF 
is described in detail in Chapter 3.

In January 1960, the second ALGOL meeting was held, this time in Paris. 
The purpose of the meeting was to debate the 80 suggestions that had been 
formally submitted for consideration. Peter Naur of Denmark had become 
heavily involved in the development of ALGOL, even though he had not been 

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   53

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
54 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

a member of the Zurich group. It was Naur who created and published the 
ALGOL Bulletin. He spent a good deal of time studying Backus’s paper that 
introduced BNF and decided that BNF should be used to describe formally 
the results of the 1960 meeting. After making a few relatively minor changes to 
BNF, he wrote a description of the new proposed language in BNF and handed 
it out to the members of the 1960 group at the beginning of the meeting.

2.5.6  ALGOL 60 Overview

Although the 1960 meeting lasted only six days, the modifications made to 
ALGOL 58 were dramatic. Among the most important new developments 
were the following:

•  The concept of block structure was introduced. This allowed the program-
mer to localize parts of programs by introducing new data environments, 
or scopes.

•  Two different means of passing parameters to subprograms were allowed: 

pass by value and pass by name.

•  Procedures were allowed to be recursive. The ALGOL 58 description was 
unclear on this issue. Note that although recursion was new for the imper-
ative languages, Lisp had already provided recursive functions in 1959.

•  Stack-dynamic arrays were allowed. A stack-dynamic array is one for which 
the subscript range or ranges are specified by variables, so that the size of 
the array is set at the time storage is allocated to the array, which happens 
when the declaration is reached during execution. Stack-dynamic arrays 
are described in detail in Chapter 6.

Several features that might have had a dramatic impact on the success or 
failure of the language were proposed and rejected. Most important among 
these were input and output statements with formatting, which were omitted 
because they were thought to be machine-dependent.

The ALGOL 60 report was published in May 1960 (Naur, 1960). A num-
ber of ambiguities still remained in the language description, and a third meet-
ing was scheduled for April 1962 in Rome to address the problems. At this 
meeting the group dealt only with problems; no additions to the language were 
allowed. The results of this meeting were published under the title “Revised 
Report on the Algorithmic Language ALGOL 60” (Backus et al., 1963).

2.5.7  Evaluation

In some ways, ALGOL 60 was a great success; in other ways, it was a dismal 
failure. It succeeded in becoming, almost immediately, the only acceptable 
formal means of communicating algorithms in computing literature, and it 
remained that for more than 20 years. Every imperative programming language 
designed since 1960 owes something to ALGOL 60. In fact, most are direct 

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   54

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.5  The First Step Toward Sophistication: ALGOL 60 

  55

or indirect descendants; examples include PL/I, SIMULA 67, ALGOL 68, C, 
Pascal, Ada, C++, Java, and C#.

The ALGOL 58/ALGOL 60 design effort included a long list of firsts. 
It was the first time that an international group attempted to design a pro-
gramming language. It was the first language that was designed to be machine 
independent. It was also the first language whose syntax was formally described. 
This successful use of the BNF formalism initiated several important fields of 
computer science: formal languages, parsing theory, and BNF-based compiler 
design. Finally, the structure of ALGOL 60 affected machine architecture. In the 
most striking example of this, an extension of the language was used as the sys-
tems language of a series of large-scale computers, the Burroughs B5000, B6000, 
and B7000 machines, which were designed with a hardware stack to implement 
efficiently the block structure and recursive subprograms of the language.

On the other side of the coin, ALGOL 60 never achieved widespread use 
in the United States. Even in Europe, where it was more popular than in the 
United States, it never became the dominant language. There are a number 
of reasons for its lack of acceptance. For one thing, some of the features of 
ALGOL 60 turned out to be too f lexible; they made understanding difficult 
and implementation inefficient. The best example of this is the pass-by-name 
method of passing parameters to subprograms, which is explained in Chapter 9. 
The difficulties of implementing ALGOL 60 are evidenced by Rutishauser’s 
statement in 1967 that few, if any, implementations included the full ALGOL 
60 language (Rutishauser, 1967, p. 8).

The lack of input and output statements in the language was another major 
reason  for  its  lack  of  acceptance.  Implementation-dependent  input/output 
made programs difficult to port to other computers.

Ironically, one of the most important contributions to computer science 
associated with ALGOL 60, BNF, was also a factor in its lack of acceptance. 
Although BNF is now considered a simple and elegant means of syntax descrip-
tion, in 1960 it seemed strange and complicated.

Finally, although there were many other problems, the entrenchment of 
Fortran among users and the lack of support by IBM were probably the most 
important factors in ALGOL 60’s failure to gain widespread use.

The  ALGOL  60  effort  was  never  really  complete,  in  the  sense  that 
 ambiguities and obscurities were always a part of the language description 
(Knuth, 1967).

The following is an example of an ALGOL 60 program:

comment ALGOL 60 Example Program
 Input:  An integer, listlen, where listlen is less than
         100, followed by listlen-integer values
 Output: The number of input values that are greater than
         the average of all the input values ;
begin
  integer array intlist [1:99];
  integer listlen, counter, sum, average, result;

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   55

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
56 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

  sum := 0;
  result := 0;
  readint (listlen);
  if (listlen > 0) ^ (listlen < 100) then
    begin
comment Read input into an array and compute the average;
    for counter := 1 step 1 until listlen do
      begin
      readint (intlist[counter]);
      sum := sum + intlist[counter]
      end;
comment Compute the average;
    average := sum / listlen;
comment Count the input values that are > average;
    for counter := 1 step 1 until listlen do
      if intlist[counter] > average
        then result := result + 1;
comment Print result;
    printstring("The number of values > average is:");
    printint (result)
    end
  else
    printstring ("Error-input list length is not legal";
end 

2.6  Computerizing Business Records: COBOL

The  story  of  COBOL  is,  in  a  sense,  the  opposite  of  that  of  ALGOL  60. 
Although it has been used for nearly 60 years, COBOL has had little effect on 
the design of subsequent languages, except for PL/I. It may still be the most 
widely used language,5 although it is difficult to be sure one way or the other. 
Perhaps the most important reason why COBOL has had little inf luence is that 
few have attempted to design a new language for business applications since it 
appeared. That is due in part to how well COBOL’s capabilities meet the needs 
of its application area. Another reason is that a great deal of growth in business 
computing over the past 30 years has occurred in small businesses. In these 
businesses, very little software development has taken place. Instead, most of 
the software used is purchased as off-the-shelf packages for various general 
business applications.

5.  In the late 1990s, in a study associated with the Y2K problem, it was estimated that there 
were approximately 800 million lines of COBOL in regular use in the 22 square miles of 
Manhattan.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   56

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2.6.1  Historical Background

2.6  Computerizing Business Records: COBOL 

  57

The beginning of COBOL is somewhat similar to that of ALGOL 60, in the 
sense that the language was designed by a committee of people meeting for 
relatively short periods of time. At the time, in 1959, the state of business 
computing was similar to the state of scientific computing several years earlier, 
when Fortran was being designed. One compiled language for business appli-
cations, FLOW-MATIC, had been implemented in 1957, but it belonged to 
one manufacturer, UNIVAC, and was designed for that company’s computers. 
Another language, AIMACO, was being used by the U.S. Air Force, but it was 
only a minor variation of FLOW-MATIC. IBM had designed a programming 
language for business applications, COMTRAN (COMmercial TRANslator), 
but it had not yet been implemented. Several other language design projects 
were being planned.

2.6.2  FLOW-MATIC

The origins of FLOW-MATIC are worth at least a brief discussion, because 
it was the primary progenitor of COBOL. In December 1953, Grace Hopper 
at Remington-Rand UNIVAC wrote a proposal that was indeed prophetic. 
It suggested that “mathematical programs should be written in mathematical 
notation, data processing programs should be written in English statements” 
(Wexelblat, 1981, p. 16). Unfortunately, in 1953, it was impossible to convince 
nonprogrammers that a computer could be made to understand English words. 
It was not until 1955 that a similar proposal had some hope of being funded by 
UNIVAC management, and even then it took a prototype system to do the final 
convincing. Part of this selling process involved compiling and running a small 
program, first using English keywords, then using French keywords, and then 
using German keywords. This demonstration was considered remarkable by 
UNIVAC management and was instrumental in their acceptance of Hopper’s 
proposal.

2.6.3  COBOL Design Process

The first formal meeting on the subject of a common language for business 
applications, which was sponsored by the Department of Defense, was held 
at the Pentagon on May 28 and 29, 1959 (exactly one year after the Zurich 
ALGOL meeting). The consensus of the group was that the language, then 
named CBL (Common Business Language), should have the following general 
characteristics: Most agreed that it should use English as much as possible, 
although a few argued for a more mathematical notation. The language must 
be easy to use, even at the expense of being less powerful, in order to broaden 
the base of those who could program computers. In addition to making the 
language easy to use, it was believed that the use of English would allow man-
agers to read programs. Finally, the design should not be overly restricted by 
the problems of its implementation.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   57

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
58 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

One of the overriding concerns at the meeting was that steps to create this 
universal language should be taken quickly, as a lot of work was already being 
done to create other business languages. In addition to the existing languages, 
RCA and Sylvania were working on their own business applications languages. 
It was clear that the longer it took to produce a universal language, the more 
difficult it would be for the language to become widely used. On this basis, it 
was decided that there should be a quick study of existing languages. For this 
task, the Short Range Committee was formed.

There were early decisions  to separate  the statements of  the language 
into two categories—data description and executable operations—and to have 
statements in these two categories be in different parts of programs. One of 
the debates of the Short Range Committee was over the inclusion of sub-
scripts. Many committee members argued that subscripts were too complex 
for the people in data processing, who were thought to be uncomfortable with 
mathematical notation. Similar arguments revolved around whether arithmetic 
expressions should be included. The final report of the Short Range Commit-
tee, which was completed in December 1959, described the language that was 
later named COBOL 60.

The language specification for COBOL 60, published by the Government 
Printing Office in April 1960 (Department of Defense, 1960), was described 
as “initial.” Revised versions were published in 1961 and 1962 (Department 
of  Defense,  1961,  1962).  The  language  was  standardized  by  the  American 
National Standards Institute (ANSI) group in 1968. The next three revisions 
were standardized by ANSI in 1974, 1985, and 2002. The language continues 
to evolve today.

2.6.4  Evaluation

The  COBOL  language  originated  a  number  of  novel  concepts,  some  of 
which eventually appeared in other languages. For example, the DEFINE verb 
of COBOL 60 was the first high-level language construct for macros. More 
important,  hierarchical  data  structures  (records),  which  first  appeared  in 
Plankalkül, were first implemented in COBOL. They have been included in 
most of the imperative languages designed since then. COBOL was also the first 
language that allowed names to be truly connotative, because it allowed both 
long names (up to 30 characters) and word-connector characters (hyphens).

Overall, the data division is the strong part of COBOL’s design, whereas 
the procedure division is relatively weak. Every variable is defined in detail in 
the data division, including the number of decimal digits and the location of the 
implied decimal point. File records are also described with this level of detail, 
as are lines to be output to a printer, which makes COBOL ideal for printing 
accounting reports. Perhaps the most important weakness of the original pro-
cedure division was in its lack of functions. Versions of COBOL prior to the 
1974 standard also did not allow subprograms with parameters.

Our final comment on COBOL: It was the first programming language 
whose use was mandated by the Department of Defense (DoD). This mandate 

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   58

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.6  Computerizing Business Records: COBOL 

  59

came after its initial development, because COBOL was not designed specif-
ically for the DoD. In spite of its merits, COBOL probably would not have 
survived without that mandate. The poor performance of the early compilers 
simply made the language too expensive to use. Eventually, of course, compilers 
became more efficient and computers became much faster and cheaper and had 
much larger memories. Together, these factors allowed COBOL to succeed, 
inside and outside DoD. Its appearance led to the electronic mechanization of 
accounting, an important development by any measure.

The following is an example of a COBOL program. This program reads 
a  file  named  BAL-FWD-File  that  contains  inventory  information  about  a 
certain collection of items. Among other things, each item record includes 
the number currently on hand (BAL-ON-HAND) and the item’s reorder point 
(BAL-REORDER-POINT). The reorder point is the threshold number of items 
on hand at which more must be ordered. The program produces a list of items 
that must be reordered as a file named REORDER-LISTING.

IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
PROGRAM-ID. PRODUCE-REORDER-LISTING.

ENVIRONMENT DIVISION.
CONFIGURATION SECTION.
SOURCE-COMPUTER. DEC-VAX.
OBJECT-COMPUTER. DEC-VAX.
INPUT-OUTPUT SECTION.
FILE-CONTROL.
    SELECT BAL-FWD-FILE ASSIGN TO READER.
    SELECT REORDER-LISTING ASSIGN TO LOCAL-PRINTER.

DATA DIVISION.
FILE SECTION.
FD  BAL-FWD-FILE
    LABEL RECORDS ARE STANDARD
    RECORD CONTAINS 80 CHARACTERS.

01  BAL-FWD-CARD.
    02 BAL-ITEM-NO          PICTURE IS 9(5).
    02 BAL-ITEM-DESC        PICTURE IS X(20).
    02 FILLER               PICTURE IS X(5).
    02 BAL-UNIT-PRICE       PICTURE IS 999V99.
    02 BAL-REORDER-POINT    PICTURE IS 9(5).
    02 BAL-ON-HAND          PICTURE IS 9(5).
    02 BAL-ON-ORDER         PICTURE IS 9(5).
    02 FILLER               PICTURE IS X(30).
FD  REORDER-LISTING
    LABEL RECORDS ARE STANDARD
    RECORD CONTAINS 132 CHARACTERS.

01  REORDER-LINE.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   59

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
60 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

    02 RL-ITEM-NO           PICTURE IS Z(5).
    02 FILLER               PICTURE IS X(5).
    02 RL-ITEM-DESC         PICTURE IS X(20).
    02 FILLER               PICTURE IS X(5).
    02 RL-UNIT-PRICE        PICTURE IS ZZZ.99.
    02 FILLER               PICTURE IS X(5).
    02 RL-AVAILABLE-STOCK   PICTURE IS Z(5).
    02 FILLER               PICTURE IS X(5).
    02 RL-REORDER-POINT     PICTURE IS Z(5).
    02 FILLER               PICTURE IS X(71).

WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
01  SWITCHES.
    02 CARD-EOF-SWITCH      PICTURE IS X.
01  WORK-FIELDS.
    02 AVAILABLE-STOCK      PICTURE IS 9(5).

PROCEDURE DIVISION.
000-PRODUCE-REORDER-LISTING.
    OPEN INPUT BAL-FWD-FILE.
    OPEN OUTPUT REORDER-LISTING.
    MOVE "N" TO CARD-EOF-SWITCH.
    PERFORM 100-PRODUCE-REORDER-LINE
        UNTIL CARD-EOF-SWITCH IS EQUAL TO "Y".
    CLOSE BAL-FWD-File.
    CLOSE REORDER-LISTING.
    STOP RUN.

100-PRODUCE-REORDER-LINE.
    PERFORM 110-READ-INVENTORY-RECORD.
    IF CARD-EOF-SWITCH IS NOT EQUAL TO "Y"]
        PERFORM 120-CALCULATE-AVAILABLE-STOCK
        IF AVAILABLE-STOCK IS LESS THAN BAL-REORDER-POINT
            PERFORM 130-PRINT-REORDER-LINE.

110-READ-INVENTORY-RECORD.
    READ BAL-FWD-FILE RECORD
         AT END
             MOVE "Y" TO CARD-EOF-SWITCH.

120-CALCULATE-AVAILABLE-STOCK.
ADD BAL-ON-HAND BAL-ON-ORDER
    GIVING AVAILABLE-STOCK.

130-PRINT-REORDER-LINE.
    MOVE SPACE               TO REORDER-LINE.
    MOVE BAL-ITEM-NO         TO RL-ITEM-NO.
    MOVE BAL-ITEM-DESC       TO RL-ITEM-DESC.
    MOVE BAL-UNIT-PRICE      TO RL-UNIT-PRICE.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   60

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.7  The Beginnings of Timesharing: Basic 

  61

     MOVE AVAILABLE-STOCK     TO RL-AVAILABLE-STOCK.
     MOVE BAL-REORDER-POINT   TO RL-REORDER-POINT.
     WRITE REORDER-LINE.

2.7  The Beginnings of Timesharing: Basic

Basic (Mather and Waite, 1971) is another programming language that has 
enjoyed widespread use but has gotten little respect. Like COBOL, it has 
largely been ignored by computer scientists. Also, like COBOL, in its ear-
liest  versions  it  was  inelegant  and  included  only  a  meager  set  of  control 
statements.

Basic was very popular on microcomputers in the late 1970s and early 
1980s. This followed directly from two of the main characteristics of early 
versions of Basic. It was easy for beginners to learn, especially those who were 
not science oriented, and its smaller dialects could be implemented on com-
puters with very small memories.6 When the capabilities of microcomput-
ers grew and other languages were implemented, the use of Basic waned. A 
strong resurgence in the use of Basic began with the appearance of Visual Basic  
(Microsoft, 1991) in the early 1990s.

2.7.1  Design Process

Basic  (Beginner’s  All-purpose  Symbolic  Instruction  Code)  was  originally 
designed at Dartmouth College (now Dartmouth University) in New Hamp-
shire  by  two  mathematicians,  John  Kemeny  and  Thomas  Kurtz,  who,  in 
the early 1960s, developed compilers for a variety of dialects of Fortran and 
ALGOL 60. Their science students generally had little trouble learning or 
using those languages in their studies. However, Dartmouth was primarily a 
liberal arts institution, where science and engineering students made up only 
about 25 percent of the student body. It was decided in the spring of 1963 to 
design a new language especially for liberal arts students. This new language 
would use terminals as the method of computer access. The goals of the system 
were as follows:

1.  It must be easy for nonscience students to learn and use.

2.  It must be “pleasant and friendly.”

3.  It must provide fast turnaround for homework.

4.  It must allow free and private access.

5.  It must consider user time more important than computer time.

6.  Some early microcomputers included Basic interpreters that resided in 4096 bytes of ROM.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   61

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
62 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

The last goal was indeed a revolutionary concept. It was based at least 
partly on the belief that computers would become significantly cheaper as time 
went on, which they certainly did.

The combination of the second, third, and fourth goals led to the time-
shared  aspect  of  Basic.  Only  with  individual  access  through  terminals  by 
numerous simultaneous users could these goals be met in the early 1960s.

In the summer of 1963, Kemeny began work on the compiler for the first 
version of Basic, using remote access to a GE 225 computer. Design and coding 
of the operating system for Basic began in the fall of 1963. At 4:00 a.m. on May 
1, 1964, the first program using the timeshared Basic was typed in and run. In 
June, the number of terminals on the system grew to 11, and by the fall it had 
ballooned to 20.

2.7.2  Language Overview

The original version of Basic was very small and, oddly, was not interactive: 
There was no way for an executing program to get input data from the user. 
Programs were typed in, compiled, and run, in a sort of batch-oriented way. 
The original Basic had only 14 different statement types and a single data 
type—f loating-point. Because it was believed that few of the targeted users 
would appreciate the difference between integer and f loating-point types, the 
type was referred to as “numbers.” Overall, it was a very limited language, 
though quite easy to learn.

2.7.3  Evaluation

The most important aspect of the original Basic was that it was the first widely 
used language that was used through terminals connected to a remote com-
puter.7 Terminals had just begun to be available at that time. Before then, 
most programs were entered into computers through either punched cards 
or paper tape.

Much of the design of Basic came from Fortran, with some minor inf lu-
ence from the syntax of ALGOL 60. Later, it grew in a variety of ways, with 
little or no effort made to standardize it. The American National Standards 
Institute issued a Minimal Basic standard (ANSI, 1978b), but this represented 
only the bare minimum of language features. In fact, the original Basic was very 
similar to Minimal Basic.

Although it may seem surprising, Digital Equipment Corporation used 
a rather elaborate version of Basic named Basic-PLUS to write significant 

7.  Lisp initially was used through terminals, but it was not widely used in the early 1960s.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   62

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2.7  The Beginnings of Timesharing: Basic 

  63

portions of their largest operating system for the PDP-11 minicomputers, 
RSTS, in the 1970s.

Basic has been criticized for the poor structure of programs written in it, 
among other things. By the evaluation criteria discussed in Chapter 1, spe-
cifically readability and reliability, the language does indeed fare very poorly. 
Clearly, the early versions of the language were not meant for and should not 
have been used for serious programs of any significant size. Later versions are 
much better suited to such tasks.

The  resurgence  of  Basic  in  the  1990s  was  driven  by  the  appearance 
of Visual Basic (VB). VB became widely used in large part because it pro-
vided a simple way of building graphical user interfaces (GUIs), hence the 
name Visual Basic. When .NET appeared, a new version of VB came with 
it, VB.NET. Although it was a significant departure from earlier versions 
of VB, it quickly displaced the older language. Perhaps the most important 
difference between VB and the .NET version is that the later version fully 
supports object-oriented programming.

The following is an example of a Basic program:

REM  Basic Example Program
REM  Input:  An integer, listlen, where listlen is less
REM          than 100, followed by listlen-integer values
REM  Output: The number of input values that are greater
REM          than the average of all input values
  DIM intlist(99)
  result = 0
  sum = 0
  INPUT listlen
  IF listlen > 0 AND listlen < 100 THEN
REM  Read input into an array and compute the sum
   FOR counter = 1 TO listlen
     INPUT intlist(counter)
     sum = sum + intlist(counter)
   NEXT counter
REM  Compute the average
   average = sum / listlen
REM  Count the number of input values that are > average
   FOR counter = 1 TO listlen
     IF intlist(counter) > average
        THEN result = result + 1
   NEXT counter
REM  Print the result
    PRINT "The number of values that are > average is:";
           result
  ELSE
   PRINT "Error-input list length is not legal"
  END IF
END

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   63

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
interview

User Design and Language Design

A L A N   C O O P E R
Best-selling author of About Face: The Essentials of User Interface Design, Alan 
Cooper also had a large hand in designing what can be touted as the language with 
the most concern for user interface design, Visual Basic. For him, it all comes down 
to a vision for humanizing technology.

SOME INFORMATION ON THE BASICS

How did you get started in all of this? I’m a high 
school dropout with an associate degree in program-
ming from a California community college. My first job 
was as a programmer for American President Lines 
(one of the United States’ oldest ocean transportation 
companies) in San Francisco. Except for a few months 
here and there, I’ve remained self-employed.

What is your current job? Founder and chairman 
of Cooper, the company that humanizes technology 
(www.cooper.com).

What is or was your favorite job? Interaction design 
consultant.

You are very well known in the fields of language 
design and user interface design. Any thoughts 
on designing languages versus designing soft-
ware, versus designing anything else? It’s pretty 
much the same in the world of software: Know 
your user.

ABOUT THAT EARLY WINDOWS RELEASE

In the 1980s, you started using Windows and 
have talked about being lured by its plusses: the 
graphical user interface support and the dynam-
ically linked library that let you create tools that 
configured themselves. What about the parts of 
Windows that you eventually helped shape? I was 
very impressed by Microsoft’s inclusion of support 
for practical multitasking in Windows. This included 
dynamic relocation and interprocess communications.

64

MSDOS.exe was the shell program for the first few 
releases of Windows. It was a terrible program, and  
I believed that it could be improved dramatically, and 
I was the guy to do it. In my spare time, I immediately 
began to write a better shell program than the one 
Windows came with. I called it Tripod. Microsoft’s 
original shell, MSDOS.exe, was one of the main stum-
bling blocks to the initial success of Windows. Tripod 
attempted to solve the problem by being easier to use 
and to configure.

When was that “Aha!” moment? It wasn’t until late 
in 1987, when I was interviewing a corporate client, 
that the key design strategy for Tripod popped into 
my head. As the IS manager explained to me his need 
to create and publish a wide range of shell solutions 
to his disparate user base, I realized the conundrum 
that there is no such thing as an ideal shell. Every user 
would need their own personal shell, configured to their 
own needs and skill levels. In an instant, I perceived the 
solution to the shell design problem: It would be a shell 
construction set; a tool where each user would be able 
to construct exactly the shell that he or she needed for 
a unique mix of applications and training.

What is so compelling about the idea of a shell that 
can be individualized? Instead of me telling the users 
what the ideal shell was, they could design their own, 
personalized ideal shell. With a customizable shell, 
a programmer would create a shell that was power-
ful and wide ranging but also somewhat dangerous, 
whereas an IT manager would create a shell that could 
be given to a desk clerk that exposed only those few 
application-specific tools that the clerk used.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   64

1/5/18   11:11 PM

How did you get from writing a 
shell program to collaborating with 
Microsoft? Tripod and Ruby are the 
same thing. After I signed a deal with 
Bill Gates, I changed the name of the 
prototype from Tripod to Ruby. I then 
used the Ruby prototype as prototypes 
should be used: as a disposable model 
for constructing release-quality code. 
Which is what I did. MS took the 
release version of Ruby and added 
QuickBasic to it, creating VB. All of those original 
innovations were in Tripod/Ruby.

RUBY AS THE INCUBATOR FOR VISUAL BASIC

Let’s revisit your interest in early Windows and that 
DLL feature. The DLL wasn’t a thing, it was a facil-
ity in the OS. It allowed a programmer to build code 
objects that could be linked to at run time as opposed 
to only at compile time. This is what allowed me to 
invent the dynamically extensible parts of VB, where 
controls can be added by third-party vendors.

The Ruby product embodied many significant 
advances in software design, but two of them stand 
out as exceptionally successful. As I mentioned, the 
dynamic linking capability of Windows had always 
intrigued me, but having the tools and knowing what 
to do with them were two different things. With Ruby, 
I finally found two practical uses for dynamic linking, 
and the original program contained both. First, the 
language was both installable and could be extended 
dynamically. Second, the palette of gizmos could be 
added to dynamically.

Was your language in Ruby the first to have a 
dynamic linked library and to be linked to a visual 
front end? As far as I know, yes.

Using a simple example, what would this enable a 
programmer to do with his or her program? Pur-
chase a control, such as a grid control, from a third-
party vendor, install it on his or her computer, and have 
the grid control appear as an integral part of the lan-
guage, including the visual programming front end.

“MSDOS.exe was the shell program for the first few 

releases of Windows. It was a terrible program, and  
I believed that it could be improved dramatically, and 
I was the guy to do it. In my spare time, I immediately 
began to write a better shell program than the one 

Windows came with.”

Why do they call you “the father of Visual Basic”? 
Ruby came with a small language, one suited only 
for executing the dozen or so simple commands that 
a shell program needs. However, this language was 
implemented as a chain of DLLs, any number of which 
could be installed at run time. The internal parser 
would identify a verb and then pass it along the chain 
of DLLs until one of them acknowledged that it knew 
how to process the verb. If all of the DLLs passed, 
there was a syntax error. From our earliest discussions, 
both Microsoft and I had entertained the idea of grow-
ing the language, possibly even replacing it altogether 
with a “real” language. C was the candidate most 
frequently mentioned, but eventually, Microsoft took 
advantage of this dynamic interface to unplug our little 
shell language and replace it entirely with Quick- Basic. 
This new marriage of language to visual front end 
was static and permanent, and although the original 
dynamic interface made the coupling possible, it was 
lost in the process.

SOME FINAL COMMENTS ON NEW IDEAS

In the world of programming and programming tools, 
including languages and environments, what projects 
most interest you? I’m interested in creating program-
ming tools that are designed to help users instead of 
programmers.

What’s the most critical rule, famous quote, or design 
idea to keep in mind? Bridges are not built by engi-
neers. They are built by ironworkers.

Similarly, software programs are not built by engi-

neers. They are built by programmers.

65

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   65

1/5/18   11:11 PM

66 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

2.8  Everything for Everybody: PL/I

PL/I represents the first large-scale attempt to design a language that could 
be used for a broad spectrum of application areas. All previous and most sub-
sequent languages have focused on one particular application area, such as 
science, artificial intelligence, or business.

2.8.1  Historical Background

Like Fortran, PL/I was developed as an IBM product. By the early 1960s, the 
users of computers in industry had settled into two separate and quite different 
camps: scientific and business. From the IBM point of view, scientific pro-
grammers could use either the large-scale 7090 or the small-scale 1620 IBM 
computers. This group used f loating-point data and arrays extensively. Fortran 
was the primary language, although some assembly language also was used. 
They had their own user group, SHARE, and had little contact with anyone 
who worked on business applications.

For business applications, people used the large 7080 or the small 1401 
IBM computers. They needed the decimal and character string data types, as 
well as elaborate and efficient input and output facilities. They used COBOL, 
although in early 1963 when the PL/I story begins, the conversion from assem-
bly language to COBOL was far from complete. This category of users also 
had its own user group, GUIDE, and seldom had contact with scientific users.
In early 1963, IBM planners perceived the beginnings of a change in this 
situation. The two widely separated computer user groups were moving toward 
each other in ways that were thought certain to create problems. Scientists 
began to gather large files of data to be processed. This data required more 
sophisticated and more efficient input and output facilities. Business applica-
tions people began to use regression analysis to build management information 
systems, which required f loating-point data and arrays. It began to appear that 
computing installations would soon require two separate computers and tech-
nical staffs, supporting two very different programming languages.8

These perceptions naturally led to the concept of designing a single univer-
sal computer that would be capable of doing both f loating-point and decimal 
arithmetic, and therefore both scientific and business applications. Thus was 
born the concept of the IBM System/360 line of computers. Along with this 
came the idea of a programming language that could be used for both business 
and scientific applications. For good measure, features to support systems pro-
gramming and list processing were thrown in. Therefore, the new language was 
to replace Fortran, COBOL, Lisp, and the systems applications of assembly 
language.

8.  At the time, large computer installations required both full-time hardware and full-time sys-

tem software maintenance staff.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   66

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2.8.2  Design Process

2.8  Everything for Everybody: PL/I 

  67

The design effort began when IBM and SHARE formed the Advanced Lan-
guage Development Committee of the SHARE Fortran Project in October 
1963. This new committee quickly met and formed a subcommittee called the 
3 * 3 Committee, so named because it had three members from IBM and three 
from SHARE. The 3 * 3 Committee met for three or four days every other 
week to design the language.

As with the Short Range Committee for COBOL, the initial design was 
scheduled for completion in a remarkably short time. Apparently, regardless 
of the scope of a language design effort, in the early 1960s the prevailing belief 
was that it could be done in three months. The first version of PL/I, which 
was then named Fortran VI, was supposed to be completed by December, less 
than three months after the committee was formed. The committee pleaded 
successfully on two different occasions for extensions, moving the due date back 
to January and then to late February 1964.

The initial design concept was that the new language would be an exten-
sion  of  Fortran  IV,  maintaining  compatibility,  but  that  goal  was  dropped 
quickly along with the name Fortran VI. Until 1965, the language was known 
as NPL (New Programming Language). The first published report on NPL 
was given at the SHARE meeting in March 1964. A more complete descrip-
tion followed in April, and the version that would actually be implemented 
was published in December 1964 (IBM, 1964) by the compiler group at the 
IBM Hursley Laboratory in England, which was chosen to do the implemen-
tation. In 1965, the name was changed to PL/I to avoid the confusion of the 
name NPL with the National Physical Laboratory in England. If the com-
piler had been developed outside the United Kingdom, the name might have  
remained NPL.

2.8.3  Language Overview

Perhaps the best single-sentence description of PL/I is that it included what 
were then considered the best parts of ALGOL 60 (recursion and block struc-
ture), Fortran IV (separate compilation with communication through global 
data), and COBOL 60 (data structures, input/output, and report-generating 
facilities), along with an extensive collection of new constructs, all somehow 
cobbled together. Because PL/I is no longer a popular language, we will not 
attempt, even brief ly, to discuss all the features of the language, or even its 
most controversial constructs. Instead, we will mention some of the language’s 
contributions to the pool of knowledge of programming languages.

PL/I was the first programming language to have the following facilities:

•  Programs were allowed to create concurrently executing subprograms. 

Although this was a good idea, it was poorly developed in PL/I.

•  It was possible to detect and handle 23 different types of exceptions, or 

run-time errors.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   67

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
68 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

•  Subprograms were allowed to be used recursively, but the capability could 
be disabled, allowing more efficient linkage for nonrecursive subprograms.

•  Pointers were included as a data type.

•  Cross-sections of arrays could be referenced. For example, the third row 
of a matrix could be referenced as if it were a single-dimensioned array.

2.8.4  Evaluation

Any evaluation of PL/I must begin by recognizing the ambitiousness of the 
design effort. In retrospect, it appears naive to think that so many constructs 
could have been combined successfully. However, that judgment must be tem-
pered by acknowledging that there was little language design experience at the 
time. Overall, the design of PL/I was based on the premise that any construct 
that was useful and could be implemented should be included, with insufficient 
concern about how a programmer could understand and make effective use 
of such a collection of constructs and features. Edsger Dijkstra, in his Turing 
Award Lecture (Dijkstra, 1972), made one of the strongest criticisms of the 
complexity of PL/I: “I absolutely fail to see how we can keep our growing 
programs firmly within our intellectual grip when by its sheer baroqueness 
the programming language—our basic tool, mind you!—already escapes our 
intellectual control.”

In addition to the problem with the complexity due to its large size, PL/I 
suffered from a number of what are now considered to be poorly designed 
constructs. Among these were pointers, exception handling, and concurrency, 
although we must point out that in all cases, these constructs had not appeared 
in any previous language.

In terms of usage, PL/I must be considered at least a partial success. In the 
1970s, it enjoyed significant use in both business and scientific applications. It 
was also widely used during that time as an instructional vehicle in colleges, 
primarily in several subset forms, such as PL/C (Cornell, 1977) and PL/CS 
(Conway and Constable, 1976).

The following is an example of a PL/I program:

/* PL/I PROGRAM EXAMPLE
 INPUT:   AN INTEGER, LISTLEN, WHERE LISTLEN IS LESS THAN
          100, FOLLOWED BY LISTLEN-INTEGER VALUES
 OUTPUT:  THE NUMBER OF INPUT VALUES THAT ARE GREATER THAN
          THE AVERAGE OF ALL INPUT VALUES */
PLIEX: PROCEDURE OPTIONS (MAIN);
  DECLARE INTLIST (1:99) FIXED.
  DECLARE (LISTLEN, COUNTER, SUM, AVERAGE, RESULT) FIXED;
  SUM = 0;
  RESULT = 0;
  GET LIST (LISTLEN);
  IF (LISTLEN > 0) & (LISTLEN < 100) THEN

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   68

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.9  Two Early Dynamic Languages: APL and SNOBOL 

  69

    DO;
/* READ INPUT DATA INTO AN ARRAY AND COMPUTE THE SUM */
    DO COUNTER = 1 TO LISTLEN;
      GET LIST (INTLIST (COUNTER));
      SUM = SUM + INTLIST (COUNTER);
    END;
/* COMPUTE THE AVERAGE */
    AVERAGE = SUM / LISTLEN;
/* COUNT THE NUMBER OF VALUES THAT ARE > AVERAGE */
    DO COUNTER = 1 TO LISTLEN;
      IF INTLIST (COUNTER) > AVERAGE THEN
        RESULT = RESULT + 1;
    END;
/* PRINT RESULT */
    PUT SKIP LIST ('THE NUMBER OF VALUES > AVERAGE IS:');
    PUT LIST (RESULT);
    END;
ELSE
    PUT SKIP LIST ('ERROR-INPUT LIST LENGTH IS ILLEGAL');
END PLIEX;

2.9  Two Early Dynamic Languages: APL and SNOBOL

The structure of this section is different from that of the other sections because 
the languages discussed here are very different. Neither APL nor SNOBOL 
had much inf luence on later mainstream languages.9 Some of the interesting 
features of APL are discussed later in the book.

In appearance and in purpose, APL and SNOBOL are quite different. 
They share two fundamental characteristics, however: dynamic typing and 
dynamic storage allocation. Variables in both languages are essentially untyped. 
A variable acquires a type when it is assigned a value, at which time it assumes 
the type of the value assigned. Storage is allocated to a variable only when it 
is assigned a value, because before that there is no way to know the amount of 
storage that will be needed.

2.9.1  Origins and Characteristics of APL

APL (Brown et al., 1988) was designed around 1960 by Kenneth E. Iverson at 
IBM. It was not originally designed to be an implemented programming language 
but rather was intended to be a vehicle for describing computer architecture. 

9.  However, they have had some inf luence on some nonmainstream languages (J is based on 

APL, ICON is based on SNOBOL, and AWK is partially based on SNOBOL).

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   69

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
70 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

APL was first described in the book from which it gets its name, A Programming 
Language (Iverson, 1962). In the mid-1960s, the first implementation of APL 
was developed at IBM.

APL has a large number of powerful operators that are specified with a 
large number of symbols, which created a problem for implementors.  Initially, 
APL  was  used  through  IBM  printing  terminals.  These  terminals  had  spe-
cial optional print balls that provided the odd character set required by the 
 language. One reason APL has so many operators is that it provides a large 
number of unit operations on arrays. For example, the transpose of any matrix 
is done with a single operator. The large collection of operators provides very 
high expressivity but also makes APL programs difficult to read. Therefore, 
people think of APL as a language that is best used for “throw-away” program-
ming. Although programs can be written quickly, they should be discarded after 
use because they are difficult to maintain.

APL has been around for over 55 years and is still used today, although not 

widely. Furthermore, it has not changed a great deal over its lifetime.

2.9.2  Origins and Characteristics of SNOBOL

SNOBOL (pronounced “snowball”; Griswold et al., 1971) was designed in the 
early 1960s by three people at Bell Laboratories: D. J. Farber, R. E. Griswold, 
and I. P. Polonsky (Farber et al., 1964). It was designed specifically for text 
processing. The heart of SNOBOL is a collection of powerful operations for 
string pattern matching. One of the early applications of SNOBOL was for 
writing text editors. Because the dynamic nature of SNOBOL makes it slower 
than alternative languages, it is no longer used for such programs. However, 
SNOBOL is still a live and supported language that is used for a variety of 
text-processing tasks in several different application areas.

2.10  The Beginnings of Data Abstraction: SIMULA 67

Although SIMULA 67 never achieved widespread use and had little impact on 
the programmers and computing of its time, some of the constructs it intro-
duced make it historically important.

2.10.1  Design Process

Two Norwegians, Kristen Nygaard and Ole-Johan Dahl, developed the lan-
guage SIMULA I between 1962 and 1964 at the Norwegian Computing Cen-
ter (NCC) in Oslo. They were primarily interested in using computers for 
simulation but also worked in operations research. SIMULA I was designed 
exclusively for system simulation and was first implemented in late 1964 on a 
UNIVAC 1107 computer.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   70

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.11  Orthogonal Design: ALGOL 68 

  71

As  soon  as  the  SIMULA  I  implementation  was  completed,  Nygaard 
and Dahl began efforts to extend the language by adding new features and 
modifying some existing constructs in order to make the language useful for 
 general-purpose applications. The result of this work was SIMULA 67, whose 
design was first presented publicly in March 1967 (Dahl and Nygaard, 1967). 
We will discuss only SIMULA 67, although some of the features of interest in 
SIMULA 67 are also in SIMULA I.

2.10.2  Language Overview

SIMULA 67 is an extension of ALGOL 60, taking both block structure and the 
control statements from that language. The primary deficiency of ALGOL 60 
(and other languages at that time) for simulation applications was the design of 
its subprograms. Simulation requires subprograms that are allowed to restart 
at the position where they previously stopped. Subprograms with this kind of 
control are known as coroutines because the caller and called subprograms 
have a somewhat equal relationship with each other, rather than the rigid 
master/slave relationship they have in most imperative languages.

To  provide  support  for  coroutines  in  SIMULA  67,  the  class  construct 
was developed. This was an important development because the concept of 
data abstraction began with it and data abstraction provides the foundation for 
object-oriented programming.

It is interesting to note that the important concept of data abstraction was 
not developed and attributed to the class construct until 1972, when Hoare 
(1972) recognized the connection.

2.11  Orthogonal Design: ALGOL 68

ALGOL 68 was the source of several new ideas in language design, some of 
which were subsequently adopted by other languages. We include it here for 
that reason, even though it never achieved widespread use in either Europe or 
the United States.

2.11.1  Design Process

The development of the ALGOL family did not end when the revised report 
on ALGOL 60 appeared in 1962, although it was six years until the next design 
iteration was published. The resulting language, ALGOL 68 (van Wijngaarden 
et al., 1969), was dramatically different from its predecessor.

One of the most interesting innovations of ALGOL 68 was one of its pri-
mary design criteria: orthogonality. Recall our discussion of orthogonality in 
Chapter 1. The use of orthogonality resulted in several innovative features of 
ALGOL 68, one of which is described in the following section.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   71

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
72 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

2.11.2  Language Overview

One  important  result  of  orthogonality  in  ALGOL  68  was  its  inclusion  of 
user-defined data types. Earlier languages, such as Fortran, included only a 
few basic data structures. PL/I included a larger number of data structures, 
which made it harder to learn and difficult to implement, but it still could not 
provide an appropriate data structure for every need.

The approach of ALGOL 68 to data structures was to provide a few prim-
itive types and structures and allow the user to combine those primitives to 
define a large number of different structures. This provision for user-defined 
data types was carried over to some extent into all of the major imperative 
languages designed since then. User-defined data types are valuable because 
they allow the user to design data abstractions that fit particular problems very 
closely. All aspects of data types are discussed in Chapter 6.

As  another  first  in  the  area  of  data  types,  ALGOL  68  introduced  the 
kind of dynamic arrays that will be termed implicit heap-dynamic in Chapter 5. 
A dynamic array is one in which the declaration does not specify subscript 
bounds. Assignments to a dynamic array cause allocation of required storage. 
In ALGOL 68, dynamic arrays are called flex arrays.

2.11.3  Evaluation

ALGOL 68 includes a significant number of features that had not been previ-
ously used. Its use of orthogonality, which some may argue was overdone, was 
nevertheless revolutionary.

ALGOL 68 repeated one of the sins of ALGOL 60, however, and it was an 
important factor in its limited popularity. The language was described using an 
elegant and concise but also unknown metalanguage. Before one could read the 
language-describing document (van Wijngaarden et al., 1969), he or she had 
to learn the new metalanguage, called van Wijngaarden grammars, which were 
far more complex than BNF. To make matters worse, the designers invented 
a collection of words to explain the grammar and the language. For example, 
keywords were called indicants, substring extraction was called trimming, and 
the process of a subprogram execution was called a coercion of deproceduring, 
which might be meek, firm, or something else.

It is natural to contrast the design of PL/I with that of ALGOL 68, because 
they appeared only a few years apart. ALGOL 68 achieved writability by the 
principle of orthogonality: a few primitive concepts and the unrestricted use 
of a few combining mechanisms. PL/I achieved writability by including a large 
number of fixed constructs. ALGOL 68 extended the elegant simplicity of 
ALGOL 60, whereas PL/I simply threw together the features of several lan-
guages to attain its goals. Of course, it must be remembered that the goal 
of PL/I was to provide a unified tool for a broad class of problems, whereas 
ALGOL 68 was targeted to a single class: scientific applications.

PL/I achieved far greater acceptance than ALGOL 68, due largely to IBM’s 
promotional efforts and the problems of understanding and implementing 

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   72

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.12  Some Early Descendants of the ALGOLs 

  73

ALGOL 68. Implementation was a difficult problem for both, but PL/I had 
the resources of IBM to apply to building a compiler. ALGOL 68 enjoyed no 
such benefactor.

2.12  Some Early Descendants of the ALGOLs

All  imperative  languages  owe  some  of  their  design  to  ALGOL  60  and/or 
ALGOL 68. This section discusses some of the early descendants of these 
languages.

2.12.1  Simplicity by Design: Pascal

2.12.1.1  Historical Background

Niklaus Wirth (Wirth is pronounced “Virt”) was a member of the International 
Federation of Information Processing (IFIP) Working Group 2.1, which was cre-
ated to continue the development of ALGOL in the mid-1960s. In August 1965, 
Wirth and C. A. R. (“Tony”) Hoare contributed to that effort by presenting to the 
group a somewhat modest proposal for additions and modifications to ALGOL 
60 (Wirth and Hoare, 1966). The majority of the group rejected the proposal as 
being too small an improvement over ALGOL 60. Instead, a much more complex 
revision was developed, which eventually became ALGOL 68. Wirth, along with 
a few other group members, did not believe that the ALGOL 68 report should 
have been released, based on the complexity of both the language and the meta-
language used to describe it. This position later proved to have some validity 
because the ALGOL 68 documents, and therefore the language, were indeed 
found to be challenging by the computing community.

The Wirth and Hoare version of ALGOL 60 was named ALGOL-W. It 
was implemented at Stanford University and was used primarily as an instruc-
tional vehicle, but only at a few universities. The primary contributions of 
ALGOL-W were the value-result method of passing parameters and the case 
statement for multiple selection. The value-result method is an alternative to 
ALGOL 60’s pass-by-name method. Both are discussed in Chapter 9. The case 
statement is discussed in Chapter 8.

Wirth’s next major design effort, again based on ALGOL 60, was his most 
successful: Pascal.10 The original published definition of Pascal appeared in 
1971 (Wirth, 1971). This version was modified somewhat in the implementation 
process and is described in Wirth (1973). The features that are often ascribed 
to Pascal in fact came from earlier languages. For example, user-defined data 
types were introduced in ALGOL 68, the case statement in ALGOL-W, and 
Pascal’s records are similar to those of COBOL and PL/I.

10.  Pascal is named after Blaise Pascal, a seventeenth-century French philosopher and mathema-
tician who invented the first mechanical adding machine in 1642 (among other things).

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   73

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
74 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

2.12.1.2  Evaluation

The largest impact of Pascal was on the teaching of programming. In 1970, 
most students of computer science, engineering, and science were introduced 
to programming with Fortran, although some universities used PL/I, languages 
based on PL/I, and ALGOL-W. By the mid-1970s, Pascal had become the 
most widely used language for this purpose. This was quite natural, because 
Pascal was designed specifically for teaching programming. It was not until 
the late 1990s that Pascal was no longer the most commonly used language for 
teaching programming in colleges and universities.

Because Pascal was designed as a teaching language, it lacks several features 
that are essential for many kinds of applications. The best example of this is 
the impossibility of writing a subprogram that takes as a parameter an array 
of variable length. Another example is the lack of any separate compilation 
capability. These deficiencies naturally led to many nonstandard dialects, such 
as Turbo Pascal.

Pascal’s popularity, for both teaching programming and other applications, 
was based primarily on its remarkable combination of simplicity and expres-
sivity. Although there are some insecurities in Pascal, it is still a relatively safe 
language, particularly when compared with Fortran or C. By the mid-1990s, 
the popularity of Pascal was on the decline, both in industry and in universities, 
primarily due to the rise of Modula-2, Ada, and C++, all of which included 
features not available in Pascal.

The following is an example of a Pascal program:

{Pascal Example Program
 Input:   An integer, listlen, where listlen is less than
          100, followed by listlen-integer values
 Output:  The number of input values that are greater than
          the average of all input values }
program pasex (input, output);
  type intlisttype = array [1..99] of integer;
  var
    intlist : intlisttype;
    listlen, counter, sum, average, result : integer;
  begin
  result := 0;
  sum := 0;
  readln (listlen);
  if ((listlen > 0) and (listlen < 100)) then
    begin
{ Read input into an array and compute the sum }
  for counter := 1 to listlen do
    begin
    readln (intlist[counter]);
    sum := sum + intlist[counter]
    end;
{ Compute the average }
    average := sum / listlen;

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   74

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.12  Some Early Descendants of the ALGOLs 

  75

{ Count the number of input values that are > average }
      for counter := 1 to listlen do
        if (intlist[counter] > average) then
          result := result + 1;
{ Print the result }
    writeln ('The number of values > average is:',
              result)
    end  { of the then clause of if (( listlen > 0 ... }
  else
    writeln ('Error-input list length is not legal')
end. 

2.12.2  A Portable Systems Language: C

Like Pascal, C contributed little to the previously known collection of language 
features, but it has been widely used over a long period of time. Although orig-
inally designed for systems programming, C is well suited for a wide variety 
of applications.

2.12.2.1  Historical Background

C’s ancestors include CPL, BCPL, B, and ALGOL 68. CPL was developed at 
Cambridge University in the early 1960s. BCPL is a simple systems language, 
also developed at Cambridge, this time by Martin Richards in 1967 (Richards, 
1969).

The first work on the UNIX operating system was done in the late 1960s 
by Ken Thompson at Bell Laboratories. The first version was written in assem-
bly language. The first high-level language implemented under UNIX was B, 
which was based on BCPL. B was designed and implemented by Thompson 
in 1970.

Neither BCPL nor B is a typed language, which is an oddity among high-
level languages, although both are much lower-level than a language such 
as Java. Being untyped means that all data are considered machine words, 
which, although simple, leads to many complications and insecurities. For 
example, there is the problem of specifying f loating-point rather than integer 
arithmetic in an expression. In one implementation of BCPL, the variable 
operands of a f loating-point operation were preceded by periods. Variable 
operands not preceded by periods were considered to be integers. An alter-
native to this would have been to use different symbols for the f loating-point 
operators.

This problem, along with several others, led to the development of a 
new typed language based on B. Originally called NB but later named C, 
it was designed and implemented by Dennis Ritchie at Bell Laboratories in 
1972 (Kernighan and Ritchie, 1978). In some cases through BCPL, and in 
other cases directly, C was inf luenced by ALGOL 68. This is seen in its for 
and switch statements, in its assigning operators, and in its treatment of 
pointers.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   75

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
76 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

The only “standard” for C in its first decade and a half was the book by 
Kernighan  and  Ritchie  (1978).11  Over  that  time  span,  the  language  slowly 
evolved, with different implementors adding different features. In 1989, ANSI 
produced an official description of C (ANSI, 1989), which included many of 
the features that implementors had already incorporated into the language. 
This standard was updated in 1999 (ISO, 1999). This later version includes a 
few significant changes to the language. Among these are a complex data type, 
a Boolean data type, and C++-style comments (//). We will refer to the 1989 
version, which has long been called ANSI C, as C89; we will refer to the 1999 
version as C99.

2.12.2.2  Evaluation

C has adequate control statements and data-structuring facilities to allow its 
use in many application areas. It also has a rich set of operators that provide a 
high degree of expressiveness.

One of the most important reasons why C is both liked and disliked is its 
lack of complete type checking. For example, in versions before C99, functions 
could be written for which parameters were not type checked. Those who like 
C appreciate the f lexibility; those who do not like it find it too insecure. A 
major reason for its great increase in popularity in the 1980s was that a compiler 
for it was part of the widely used UNIX operating system. This inclusion in 
UNIX provided an essentially free and quite good compiler that was available 
to programmers on many different kinds of computers.
The following is an example of a C program:

/* C Example Program
 Input:  An integer, listlen, where listlen is less than
         100, followed by listlen-integer values
 Output: The number of input values that are greater than
         the average of all input values */
int main (){
  int intlist[99], listlen, counter, sum, average, result;
  sum = 0;
  result = 0;
  scanf("%d", &listlen);
  if ((listlen > 0) && (listlen < 100)) {
/* Read input into an array and compute the sum */
    for (counter = 0; counter < listlen; counter++) {
     scanf("%d", &intlist[counter]);
     sum += intlist[counter];
    }
/* Compute the average */
    average = sum / listlen;

11.  This language is often referred to as “K & R C.”

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   76

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2.13  Programming Based on Logic: Prolog 

  77

/* Count the input values that are > average */
     for  (counter = 0; counter < listlen; counter++)
       if  (intlist[counter] > average) result++;
/* Print result */
    printf("Number of values > average is:%d\n", result);
  }
  else
    printf("Error-input list length is not legal\n");
}

2.13  Programming Based on Logic: Prolog

Simply put, logic programming is the use of a formal logic notation to commu-
nicate computational processes to a computer. Predicate calculus is the notation 
used in current logic programming languages.

Programming  in  logic  programming  languages  is  nonprocedural. 
 Programs in such languages do not state exactly how a result is to be computed 
but rather describe the necessary form and/or characteristics of the result. 
What is needed to provide this capability in logic programming languages is a 
concise means of supplying the computer with both the relevant information 
and an inferencing process for computing desired results. Predicate calculus 
supplies the basic form of communication to the computer, and the proof 
method, named resolution, developed first by Robinson (1965), supplies the 
inferencing technique.

2.13.1  Design Process

During  the  early  1970s,  Alain  Colmerauer  and  Phillippe  Roussel  in  the 
 Artificial Intelligence Group at the University of Aix-Marseille, together with 
Robert  Kowalski of the Department of Artificial Intelligence at the Univer-
sity of Edinburgh, developed the fundamental design of Prolog. The primary 
components of Prolog are a method for specifying predicate calculus proposi-
tions and an implementation of a restricted form of resolution. Both predicate 
calculus and resolution are described in Chapter 16. The first Prolog inter-
preter was developed at Marseille in 1972. The version of the language that 
was implemented is described in Roussel (1975). The name Prolog is from 
programming logic.

2.13.2  Language Overview

Prolog programs consist of collections of statements. Prolog has only a few 
kinds of statements, but they can be complex.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   77

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
78 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

One common use of Prolog is as a kind of intelligent database. This appli-

cation provides a simple framework for discussing the Prolog language.

The database of a Prolog program consists of two kinds of statements: facts 

and rules. The following are examples of fact statements:

mother(joanne, jake).
father(vern, joanne).

These state that joanne is the mother of jake, and vern is the father of 
joanne.

An example of a rule statement is

grandparent(X, Z) :- parent(X, Y), parent(Y, Z).

This states that it can be deduced that X is the grandparent of Z if it is true 
that X is the parent of Y and Y is the parent of Z, for some specific values for 
the variables X, Y, and Z.

The Prolog database can be interactively queried with goal statements, an 

example of which is

father(bob, darcie).

This asks if  bob is the  father of  darcie. When such a query, or goal, is 
presented to the Prolog system, it uses its resolution process to attempt to 
determine the truth of the statement. If it can conclude that the goal is true, it 
displays “true.” If it cannot prove it, it displays “false.”

2.13.3  Evaluation

In the 1980s, there was a relatively small group of computer scientists who 
believed that logic programming provided the best hope for escaping from 
the complexity of imperative languages, and also from the enormous prob-
lem  of  producing  the  large  amount  of  reliable  software  that  was  needed. 
So far, however, there are two major reasons why logic programming has 
not  become  more  widely  used.  First,  as  with  some  other  nonimperative 
approaches,  programs  written  in  logic  languages  thus  far  have  proven  to 
be highly inefficient relative to equivalent imperative programs. Second, it 
has been determined that it is an effective approach for only a few relatively 
small areas of application: certain kinds of database management systems and 
some areas of AI.

There is a dialect of Prolog that supports object-oriented programming: 
Prolog++  (Moss,  1994).  Logic  programming  and  Prolog  are  described  in 
greater detail in Chapter 16.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   78

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.14  History’s Largest Design Effort: Ada

2.14  History’s Largest Design Effort: Ada 

  79

The Ada language is the result of the most extensive and expensive language 
design effort ever undertaken. The following paragraphs brief ly describe the 
evolution of Ada.

2.14.1  Historical Background

The Ada language was developed for the Department of Defense (DoD), so 
the state of their computing environment was instrumental in determining its 
form. By 1974, over half of the applications of computers in DoD were embed-
ded systems. An embedded system is one in which the computer hardware is 
embedded in the device it controls or for which it provides services. Software 
costs were rising  rapidly, primarily because of the increasing complexity of 
systems. More than 450 different programming languages were in use for DoD 
projects, and none of them was standardized by DoD. Every defense contractor 
could define a new and different language for every contract.12 Because of this 
language proliferation, application software was rarely reused. Furthermore, 
no software development tools were created (because they are usually language 
dependent). A great many languages were in use, but none was actually suit-
able for embedded systems applications. For these reasons, in 1974, the Army, 
Navy, and Air Force each independently proposed the development of a single  
high-level language for embedded systems.

2.14.2  Design Process

Noting this widespread interest, in January 1975, Malcolm Currie, director of 
Defense Research and Engineering, formed the High-Order Language Work-
ing Group (HOLWG), initially headed by Lt. Col. William Whitaker of the 
Air Force. The HOLWG had representatives from all of the military services 
and liaisons with Great Britain, France, and what was then West Germany. Its 
initial charter was to do the following:

•  Identify the requirements for a new DoD high-level language.

•  Evaluate  existing  languages  to  determine  whether  there  was  a  viable 

candidate.

•  Recommend adoption or implementation of a minimal set of programming 

languages.

In April 1975, the HOLWG produced the Strawman requirements docu-
ment for the new language (Department of Defense, 1975a). This was distrib-
uted to military branches, federal agencies, selected industrial and university 
representatives, and interested parties in Europe.

12.  This result was largely due to the widespread use of assembly language for embedded  

systems, along with the fact that most embedded systems used specialized processors.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   79

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
80 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

The Strawman document was followed by Woodenman (Department of 
Defense, 1975b) in August 1975, Tinman (Department of Defense, 1976) in 
January 1976, Ironman (Department of Defense, 1977) in January 1977, and 
finally Steelman (Department of Defense, 1978) in June 1978.

After a tedious process, the many submitted proposals for the language 
were narrowed down to four finalists, all of which were based on Pascal. In 
May 1979, the Cii Honeywell/Bull language design proposal was chosen from 
the four finalists as the design that would be used. The Cii Honeywell/Bull 
design team in France, the only foreign competitor among the final four, was 
led by Jean Ichbiah.

In the spring of 1979, Jack Cooper of the Navy Materiel Command rec-
ommended the name for the new language, Ada, which was then adopted. The 
name commemorates Augusta Ada Byron (1815–1851), countess of Lovelace, 
mathematician, and daughter of poet Lord Byron. She is generally recognized 
as being the world’s first programmer. She worked with Charles Babbage on 
his mechanical computers, the Difference and Analytical Engines, writing pro-
grams for several numerical processes.

The  design  and  the  rationale  for  Ada  were  published  by  ACM  in  its 
SIGPLAN Notices (ACM, 1979) and distributed to a readership of more than 
10,000 people. A public test and evaluation conference was held in October 
1979 in Boston, with representatives from over 100 organizations from the 
United States and Europe. By November, more than 500 language reports 
had been received from 15 different countries. Most of the reports suggested 
small modifications rather than drastic changes and outright rejections. Based 
on the language reports, the next version of the requirements specification, 
the Stoneman document (Department of Defense, 1980), was released in 
February 1980.

A  revised  version  of  the  language  design  was  completed  in  July  1980 
and was accepted as MIL-STD 1815, the standard Ada Language Reference 
Manual. The number 1815 was chosen because it was the year of the birth of 
Augusta Ada Byron. Another revised version of the Ada Language Reference 
Manual was released in July 1982. In 1983, the American National Standards 
Institute standardized Ada. This “final” official version is described in Goos 
and Hartmanis (1983). The Ada language design was then frozen for a min-
imum of five years.

2.14.3  Language Overview

This subsection brief ly describes four of the major contributions of the Ada 
language.

Packages in the Ada language provide the means for encapsulating data 
objects, specifications for data types, and procedures. This, in turn, provides 
the support for the use of data abstraction in program design.

The  Ada  language  includes  extensive  facilities  for  exception  handling, 
which allow the programmer to gain control after any one of a wide variety of 
exceptions, or run-time errors, has been detected.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   80

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.14  History’s Largest Design Effort: Ada 

  81

Program units can be generic in Ada. For example, it is possible to write 
a sort procedure that uses an unspecified type for the data to be sorted. Such 
a generic procedure must be instantiated for a specified type before it can be 
used, which is done with a statement that causes the compiler to generate a 
version of the procedure with the given type. The availability of such generic 
units increases the range of program units that might be reused, rather than 
duplicated, by programmers.

The Ada language also provides for concurrent execution of special pro-
gram units, named tasks, using the rendezvous mechanism. Rendezvous is the 
name of a method of intertask communication and synchronization.

2.14.4  Evaluation

Perhaps the most important aspects of the design of the Ada language to con-
sider are the following:

•  Because the design was competitive, there were no limits on participation.

•  The Ada language embodies most of the concepts of software engineering 
and language design of the late 1970s. Although one can question the actual 
approaches used to incorporate these features, as well as the wisdom of 
including such a large number of features in a language, most agree that 
the features are valuable.

•  Although most people did not anticipate it, the development of a compiler 
for the Ada language was a difficult task. Only in 1985, almost four years 
after the language design was completed, did truly usable Ada compilers 
begin to appear.

The most serious criticism of Ada in its first few years was that it was too 
large and too complex. In particular, Hoare (1981) stated that it should not be 
used for any application where reliability is critical, which is precisely the type 
of application for which it was designed. On the other hand, others have praised 
it as the epitome of language design for its time. In fact, even Hoare eventually 
softened his view of the language.

The following is an example of an Ada program:

-- Ada Example Program
-- Input:   An integer, List_Len, where List_Len is less
--          than 100, followed by List_Len-integer values
-- Output:  The number of input values that are greater
--          than the average of all input values
with Ada.Text_IO, Ada.Integer.Text_IO;
use Ada.Text_IO, Ada.Integer.Text_IO;
procedure Ada_Ex is
  type Int_List_Type is array (1..99) of Integer;
  Int_List : Int_List_Type;
  List_Len, Sum, Average, Result : Integer;

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   81

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
82 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

begin
  Result:= 0;
  Sum := 0;
  Get (List_Len);
  if (List_Len > 0) and (List_Len < 100) then  
-- Read input data into an array and compute the sum
    for Counter := 1 .. List_Len loop
      Get (Int_List(Counter));
      Sum := Sum + Int_List(Counter);
    end loop;
-- Compute the average
    Average := Sum / List_Len;
-- Count the number of values that are > average
    for Counter := 1 .. List_Len loop
      if Int_List(Counter) > Average then
        Result:= Result+ 1;
      end if;
    end loop;
-- Print result
    Put ("The number of values > average is:");
    Put (Result);
    New_Line;
  else
    Put_Line ("Error-input list length is not legal");
  end if;
end Ada_Ex;

2.14.5  Ada 95 and Ada 2005

Two of the most important new features of Ada 95 are described brief ly in the 
following paragraphs. In the remainder of the book, we will use the name Ada 
83 for the original version and Ada 95 (its actual name) for the later version 
when it is important to distinguish between the two versions. In discussions of 
language features common to both versions, we will use the name Ada. The 
Ada 95 standard language is defined in ARM (1995).

The type derivation mechanism of Ada 83 is extended in Ada 95 to allow 
adding new components to those inherited from a base class. This provides 
for inheritance, a key ingredient in object-oriented programming languages. 
Dynamic binding of subprogram calls to subprogram definitions is accom-
plished through subprogram dispatching, which is based on the tag value of 
derived types through classwide types. This feature provides for polymorphism, 
another principal feature of object-oriented programming.

The rendezvous mechanism of Ada 83 provided only a cumbersome and 
inefficient means of sharing data among concurrent processes. It was necessary 
to introduce a new task to control access to the shared data. The protected 
objects of Ada 95 offer an attractive alternative to this. The shared data is 
encapsulated in a syntactic structure that controls all access to the data, either 
by rendezvous or by subprogram call.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   82

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.15  Object-Oriented Programming: Smalltalk 

  83

It is widely believed that the popularity of Ada 95 suffered because the 
Department of Defense stopped requiring its use in military software systems. 
There  were,  of  course,  other  factors  that  hindered  its  growth  in  popular-
ity. Most important among these was the widespread acceptance of C++ for 
object-oriented programming, which occurred before Ada 95 was released.

There were several additions to Ada 95 to get Ada 2005. Among these were 
interfaces, similar to those of Java, more control of scheduling algorithms, and 
synchronized interfaces.

Ada is widely used in both commercial and defense avionics, air traffic 

control, and rail transportation, as well as in other areas.

2.15  Object-Oriented Programming: Smalltalk

Smalltalk was the first programming language that fully supported object- 
oriented programming. It is therefore an important part of any discussion of 
the evolution of programming languages.

2.15.1  Design Process

The concepts that led to the development of Smalltalk originated in the Ph.D. 
dissertation work of Alan Kay in the late 1960s at the University of Utah (Kay, 
1969). Kay had the remarkable foresight to predict the future availability of 
powerful  desktop  computers.  Recall  that  the  first  microcomputer  systems 
were not marketed until the mid-1970s, and they were only remotely related 
to the machines envisioned by Kay, which were seen to execute a million or 
more instructions per second and contain several megabytes of memory. Such 
machines, in the form of workstations, became widely available only in the 
early 1980s.

Kay believed that desktop computers would be used by nonprogrammers 
and thus would need very powerful human-interfacing capabilities. The com-
puters of the late 1960s were largely batch oriented and were used exclusively 
by professional programmers and scientists. For use by nonprogrammers, Kay 
determined, a computer would have to be highly interactive and use sophisti-
cated graphics in its user interface. Some of the graphics concepts came from 
the LOGO experience of Seymour Papert, in which graphics were used to aid 
children in the use of computers (Papert, 1980).

Kay originally envisioned a system he called Dynabook, which was meant 
to be a general information processor. It was based in part on the Flex lan-
guage, which he had helped design. Flex was based primarily on SIMULA 67. 
Dynabook used the paradigm of the typical desk, on which there are a number 
of papers, some partially covered. The top sheet is often the focus of atten-
tion, with the others temporarily out of focus. The display of Dynabook would 
model this scene, using screen windows to represent various sheets of paper 
on the desktop. The user would interact with such a display both through 

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   83

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
84 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

keystrokes and by touching the screen with his or her fingers. After the prelim-
inary design of Dynabook earned him a Ph.D., Kay’s goal became to see such 
a machine constructed.

Kay found his way to the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (Xerox PARC) 
and presented his ideas on Dynabook. This led to his employment there and the 
subsequent birth of the Learning Research Group at Xerox. The first charge of 
the group was to design a language to support Kay’s programming paradigm 
and implement it on the best personal computer then available. These efforts 
resulted in an “Interim” Dynabook, consisting of a Xerox Alto workstation 
and Smalltalk-72 software. Together, they formed a research tool for further 
development. A number of research projects were conducted with this system, 
including several experiments to teach programming to children. Along with 
the experiments came further developments, leading to a sequence of languages 
that ended with Smalltalk-80. As the language grew, so did the power of the 
hardware on which it resided. By 1980, both the language and the Xerox hard-
ware nearly matched the early vision of Alan Kay.

2.15.2  Language Overview

The Smalltalk world is populated by nothing but objects, from integer con-
stants to large complex software systems. All computing in Smalltalk is done 
by the same uniform technique: sending a message to an object to invoke one 
of its methods. A reply to a message is an object, which either returns the 
requested information or simply notifies the sender that the requested process-
ing has been completed. The fundamental difference between a message and a 
subprogram call is this: A message is sent to a data object, specifically to one of 
the methods defined for the object. The called method is then executed, often 
modifying the data of the object to which the message was sent; a subprogram 
call is a message to the code of a subprogram. Usually the data to be processed 
by the subprogram is sent to it as a parameter.13

In Smalltalk, object abstractions are classes, which are very similar to the 
classes of SIMULA 67. Instances of the class can be created and are then the 
objects of the program.

The syntax of Smalltalk is unlike that of most other programming lan-
guage, in large part because of the use of messages, rather than arithmetic and 
logic expressions and conventional control statements. One of the Smalltalk 
control constructs is illustrated in the example in the next subsection.

2.15.3  Evaluation

Smalltalk has done a great deal to promote two separate aspects of com-
puting: graphical user interfaces and object-oriented programming. The 
windowing systems that are now the dominant method of user interfaces 

13.  Of course, a method call can also pass data to be processed by the called method.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   84

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2.16  Combining Imperative and Object-Oriented Features: C++ 

  85

to software systems grew out of Smalltalk. Today, the most significant soft-
ware  design  methodologies  and  programming  languages  are  object  ori-
ented. Although the origin of some of the ideas of object-oriented languages 
came from SIMULA 67, they reached maturation in Smalltalk. It is clear 
that  Smalltalk’s  impact  on  the  computing  world  is  extensive  and  will  be 
long-lived.

The following is an example of a Smalltalk class definition:

"Smalltalk Example Program"
"The following is a class definition, instantiations of 
which can draw equilateral polygons of any number of sides"
class name                   Polygon
superclass                   Object
instance variable names      ourPen
numSides
sideLength
"Class methods"
  "Create an instance"
  new
     ^ super new getPen

  "Get a pen for drawing polygons"
  getPen
     ourPen <- Pen new defaultNib: 2

  "Instance methods"
  "Draw a polygon"
  draw
     numSides timesRepeat: [ourPen go: sideLength;
                             turn: 360 // numSides]

  "Set length of sides"
  length: len
  sideLength <- len

  "Set number of sides"
  sides: num
     numSides <- num

2.16  Combining Imperative and Object-Oriented Features: C++

The origins of C were discussed in Section  2.12; the origins of Simula 67 
were  discussed  in  Section  2.10;  the  origins  of  Smalltalk  were  discussed  in 
 Section 2.15. C++ builds language facilities, borrowed from Simula 67, on top 
of C to support much of what Smalltalk pioneered. C++ has evolved from C 
through a sequence of modifications to improve its imperative features and to 
add constructs to support object-oriented programming.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   85

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
86 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

2.16.1  Design Process

The  first  step  from  C  toward  C++  was  made  by  Bjarne  Stroustrup  at  Bell 
Laboratories in 1980. The initial modifications to C included the addition 
of function parameter type checking and conversion and, more significantly, 
classes, which are related to those of SIMULA 67 and Smalltalk. Also included 
were derived classes, public/private access control of inherited components, 
constructor and destructor methods, and friend classes. During 1981, inline 
functions, default parameters, and overloading of the assignment operator were 
added. The resulting language was called C with Classes and is described in 
Stroustrup (1983).

It is useful to consider some goals of C with Classes. The primary goal 
was to provide a language in which programs could be organized as they could 
be organized in SIMULA 67—that is, with classes and inheritance. A second 
important goal was that there should be little or no performance penalty rel-
ative to C. For example, array index range checking was not even considered 
because a significant performance disadvantage, relative to C, would result. A 
third goal of C with Classes was that it could be used for every application for 
which C could be used, so virtually none of the features of C would be removed, 
not even those considered to be unsafe.

By 1984, this language was extended by the inclusion of virtual methods, 
which provide dynamic binding of method calls to specific method definitions, 
method name and operator overloading, and reference types. This version of 
the language was called C++. It is described in Stroustrup (1984).

In  1985,  the  first  available  implementation  appeared:  a  system  named 
Cfront,  which  translated  C++  programs  into  C  programs.  This  version  of 
Cfront and the version of C++ it implemented were named Release 1.0. It is 
described in Stroustrup (1986).

Between  1985  and  1989,  C++  continued  to  evolve,  based  largely  on 
user reactions to the first distributed implementation. This next version was 
named Release 2.0. Its Cfront implementation was released in June 1989. 
The most important features added to C++ Release 2.0 were support for 
multiple inheritance (classes with more than one parent class) and abstract 
classes, along with some other enhancements. Abstract classes are described 
in Chapter 12.

Release 3.0 of C++ evolved between 1989 and 1990. It added templates, 
which provide parameterized types, and exception handling. The current ver-
sion of C++, which was standardized in 1998, is described in ISO (1998).

In 2002, Microsoft released its .NET computing platform, which included 
a new version of C++, named Managed C++, or MC++. MC++ extends C++ 
to provide access to the functionality of the .NET Framework. The additions 
include properties, delegates, interfaces, and a reference type for garbage- 
collected objects. Properties are discussed in Chapter 11. Delegates are brief ly 
discussed in the introduction to C# in Section 2.19. Because .NET does not 
support multiple inheritance, neither does MC++.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   86

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.16  Combining Imperative and Object-Oriented Features: C++ 

  87

2.16.2  Language Overview

Because C++ has both functions and methods, it supports both procedural and 
object-oriented programming.

Operators in C++ can be overloaded, meaning the user can create oper-
ators for existing operators on user-defined types. C++ methods can also be 
overloaded, meaning the user can define more than one method with the same 
name, provided either the numbers or types of their parameters are different.
Dynamic binding in C++ is provided by virtual methods. These methods 
define type-dependent operations, using overloaded methods, within a collec-
tion of classes that are related through inheritance. A pointer to an object of 
class A can also point to objects of classes that have class A as an ancestor. When 
this pointer points to an overloaded virtual method, the method of the current 
type is chosen dynamically.

Both methods and classes can be templated, which means that they can be 
parameterized. For example, a method can be written as a templated method 
to allow it to have versions for a variety of parameter types. Classes enjoy the 
same f lexibility.

C++ supports multiple inheritance. The exception-handling constructs of 

C++ are discussed in Chapter 14.

2.16.3  Evaluation

C++ rapidly became and remains a widely used language. One factor in its 
popularity is the availability of good and inexpensive compilers. Another factor 
is that it is almost completely backward compatible with C (meaning that C 
programs, with few changes, can be compiled as C++ programs), and in most 
implementations it is possible to link C++ code with C code—and thus rela-
tively easy for the many C programmers to learn C++. Finally, at the time C++ 
first appeared, when object-oriented programming began to receive widespread 
interest, C++ was the only available language that was suitable for large com-
mercial software projects.

On the negative side, because C++ is a very large and complex language, 
it clearly suffers drawbacks similar to those of PL/I. It inherited most of the 
insecurities of C, which make it less safe than languages such as Ada and Java.

2.16.4  A Replacement for Objective-C, Swift

Beginning with MAC OS X in 2002, Apple systems software was written in 
Objective-C. Swift was developed by Apple as an improved replacement for 
Objective-C. Work on Swift began in 2010 by Chris Lattner. The language was 
introduced in 2014, with version 2 being introduced in 2015. The first version 
was proprietary, but the second is open source. It is currently implemented 
under all of Apple’s operating systems, as well as on Linux.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   87

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
88 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

Among the features of Swift are a tuple data type, an option type  (variables 
of  this  type  can  have  a  special  no-value  value),  protocols  (similar  to  Java 
 interfaces),  two  categories  of  types,  class  and  struct,  which  support  refer-
ence types and value types, as in C#, generic types, no pointers, a safer switch 
 construct, in which the default is to not fall through to the next option, and all 
statement collections, including a single statement, must be enclosed in braces 
in all control constructs.

Statements need not be terminated with semicolons, unless there are two 
or more statements on the same line. Types of data need not be declared, as 
type inferencing is used. Unlike C and C++, assignment statements do not 
return  a  value,  so  using  x  =  0  is  not  legal  in  a  Boolean  expression.  This 
eliminates a common error in C and C++ programs, in which x = 0 is typed 
instead of x == 0. Heap allocated objects are automatically reclaimed, using 
reference counters.

Swift programs can interact with Objective-C code and Swift uses the same 
libraries as that language. Swift is already the tenth most popular programming 
language, according to the TIOBE Community Report.

2.16.5  Another Related Language: Delphi

Delphi (Lischner, 2000) is a hybrid language, similar to C++ and  Objective-C, 
in that it was created by adding object-oriented support, among other things, 
to  an  existing  imperative  language,  in  this  case  Pascal.  Apple  designed  an 
object-oriented  version  of  Pascal,  named  Object  Pascal,  but  subsequently 
dropped the project. Borland, which had developed Turbo Pascal for  Windows, 
also designed an object-oriented version of Pascal, based on Turbo Pascal, also 
named Object Pascal. For several reasons, Borland renamed Object Pascal 
as Delphi. The first product with that name, which included an integrated 
development environment (IDE), was released in 1995. Some consider the 
IDE to be Delphi and the underlying programming language to be Object 
Pascal. Other suppliers of similar products continue to refer to the language 
as Object Pascal.

Many of the differences between C++ and Delphi are a result of the prede-
cessor language and the surrounding programming cultures from which they 
are derived. Because C is a powerful but potentially unsafe language, C++ also 
fits that description, at least in the areas of array subscript range checking, 
pointer arithmetic, and its numerous type coercions. Similarly, because Pascal 
is more elegant and safer than C, Delphi is more elegant and safer than C++. 
Delphi is also less complex than C++. For example, Delphi does not include 
user-defined operator overloading, generic subprograms, and parameterized 
classes, all of which are part of C++.

Delphi was designed by Anders Hejlsberg, who had previously developed 
the Turbo Pascal system. Hejlsberg, who moved to Microsoft in 1996, was the 
lead designer of C#.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   88

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.17  An Imperative-Based Object-Oriented Language: Java 

  89

2.17  An Imperative-Based Object-Oriented Language: Java

Java’s designers started with C++, removed some constructs, changed some, 
and added a few others. The resulting language provides much of the power 
and f lexibility of C++, but in a smaller, simpler, and safer language. Since that 
initial design, Java has grown considerably.

2.17.1  Design Process

Java, like many programming languages, was designed for an application for 
which there appeared to be no satisfactory existing language. In 1990, Sun 
Microsystems determined there was a need for a programming language for 
embedded consumer electronic devices, such as toasters, microwave ovens, and 
interactive TV systems. Reliability was one of the primary goals for such a 
language. It may not seem that reliability would be an important factor in the 
software for a microwave oven. If an oven had malfunctioning software, it prob-
ably would not pose a grave danger to anyone and most likely would not lead 
to large legal settlements. However, if the software in a particular model was 
found to be erroneous after a million units had been manufactured and sold, 
their recall would entail significant cost. Therefore, reliability is an important 
characteristic of the software in consumer electronic products.

After considering C and C++, it was decided that neither would be satisfac-
tory for developing software for consumer electronic devices. Although C was 
relatively small, it did not provide support for object-oriented programming, 
which they deemed a necessity. C++ supported object-oriented programming, 
but it was judged to be too large and complex, in part because it also supported 
procedure-oriented programming. It was also believed that neither C nor C++ 
provided the necessary level of reliability. So, a new language, later named 
Java, was designed. Its design was guided by the fundamental goal of providing 
greater simplicity and reliability than C++ was believed to provide.

Although the initial impetus for Java was consumer electronics, none of the 
products with which it was used in its early years were ever marketed. Starting 
in 1993, when the World Wide Web became widely used, and largely because of 
the new graphical browsers, Java was found to be a useful tool for Web program-
ming. In particular, Java applets, which are relatively small Java programs that 
are interpreted in Web browsers and whose output can be included in displayed 
Web documents, quickly became very popular in the middle to late 1990s. In 
the first few years of Java popularity, the Web was its most common application.
The Java design team was headed by James Gosling, who had previously 

designed the UNIX emacs editor and the NeWS windowing system.

2.17.2  Language Overview

As we stated previously, Java is based on C++ but it was specifically designed 
to be smaller, simpler, and more reliable. Like C++, Java has both classes and 
primitive types. Java arrays are instances of a predefined class, whereas in C++ 

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   89

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
90 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

they are not, although many C++ users build wrapper classes for arrays to add 
features like index range checking, which is implicit in Java.

Java does not have pointers, but its reference types provide some of the 
capabilities of pointers. These references are used to point to class instances. 
All objects are allocated on the heap. References are always implicitly deref-
erenced, when necessary. So they behave more like ordinary scalar variables.

Java has a primitive Boolean type named boolean, used mainly for the 
control expressions of its control statements (such as if and while). Unlike C 
and C++, arithmetic expressions cannot be used for control expressions.

One significant difference between Java and many of its predecessors that 
support object-oriented programming, including C++, is that it is not possi-
ble to write stand-alone subprograms in Java. All Java subprograms are meth-
ods and are defined in classes. Furthermore, methods can be called through a 
class or object only. One consequence of this is that while C++ supports both 
procedural and object-oriented programming, Java supports object-oriented 
programming only.

Another important difference between C++ and Java is that C++ supports 
multiple inheritance directly in its class definitions. Java supports only single 
inheritance of classes, although some of the benefits of multiple inheritance can 
be gained by using its interface construct.

Among the C++ constructs that were not copied into Java are structs and 

unions.

Java includes a relatively simple form of concurrency control through its 
synchronized modifier, which can appear on methods and blocks. In either 
case, it causes a lock to be attached. The lock ensures mutually exclusive access 
or execution. In Java, it is relatively easy to create concurrent processes, which 
in Java are called threads.

Java uses implicit storage deallocation for its objects, often called garbage 
collection. This frees the programmer from needing to delete objects explicitly 
when they are no longer needed. Programs written in languages that do not 
have garbage collection often suffer from what is sometimes called memory 
leakage, which means that storage is allocated but never deallocated. This can 
obviously lead to eventual depletion of all available storage. Object deallocation 
is discussed in detail in Chapter 6.

Unlike C and C++, Java includes assignment type coercions (implicit type 
conversions) only if they are widening (from a “smaller” type to a “larger” type). 
So int to float coercions are done across the assignment operator, but float 
to int coercions are not.

2.17.3  Evaluation

The designers of Java did well at trimming the excess and/or unsafe features 
of  C++.  For  example,  the  elimination  of  half  of  the  assignment  coercions 
that are done in C++ was clearly a step toward higher reliability. Index range 
checking of array accesses also makes the language safer. The addition of 

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   90

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.17  An Imperative-Based Object-Oriented Language: Java 

  91

concurrency enhances the range of applications that can be written in the 
language, as do the class libraries for graphical user interfaces, database access, 
and networking.

Java’s portability, at least in intermediate form, has often been attributed 
to the design of the language, but it is not. Any language can be translated to 
an intermediate form and “run” on any platform that has a virtual machine 
for that intermediate form. The price of this kind of portability is the cost of 
interpretation, which traditionally has been about an order of magnitude more 
than execution of machine code. The initial version of the Java interpreter, 
called the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), indeed was at least 10 times slower 
than equivalent compiled C programs. However, many Java programs are now 
translated to machine code before being executed, using Just-in-Time (JIT) 
compilers. This makes the efficiency of Java programs competitive with that 
of programs in conventionally compiled languages such as C++, at least when 
array index range checking is not considered.

The use of Java increased faster than that of any other programming 
language. Initially, this was due to its value in programming dynamic Web 
documents. Clearly, one of the reasons for Java’s rapid rise to prominence is 
simply that programmers like its design. Some developers thought C++ was 
too large and complex to be practical and safe. Java offered them an alter-
native that has much of the power of C++, but in a simpler, safer language. 
Another reason is that the compiler/interpreter system for Java is free and 
easily obtained on the Web. Java is now widely used in a variety of different 
applications areas.

The most recent version of Java, Java SE8, appeared in 2014. Since the first 
version, significant features have been added to the language. Among these are 
an enumeration class, generics, a new iteration construct, lambda expressions, 
and numerous class libraries.

The following is an example of a Java program:

// Java Example Program
// Input:   An integer, listlen, where listlen is less
//          than 100, followed by length-integer values
// Output:  The number of input data that are greater than
//          the average of all input values
import java.io.*;
class IntSort {
public static void main(String args[]) throws IOException {
  DataInputStream in = new DataInputStream(System.in);
  int listlen,
      counter,
      sum = 0,
      average,
      result = 0;
  int[] intlist =  new int[99];
  listlen = Integer.parseInt(in.readLine());
  if ((listlen > 0) && (listlen < 100)) {

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   91

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
92 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

/* Read input into an array and compute the sum */
    for (counter = 0; counter < listlen; counter++) {
      intlist[counter] =
             Integer.valueOf(in.readLine()).intValue();
      sum += intlist[counter];
    }
/* Compute the average */
    average = sum / listlen;
/* Count the input values that are > average */
    for (counter = 0; counter < listlen; counter++)
      if (intlist[counter] > average) result++;
/* Print result */
      System.out.println(
          "\nNumber of values > average is:" + result);
    } //** end of then clause of if ((listlen > 0) ... 
    else System.out.println(
             "Error-input list length is not legal\n");
  } //** end of method main
} //** end of class IntSort

2.18  Scripting Languages

Scripting  languages  have  evolved  over  the  past  35  years.  Early  scripting 
 languages were used by putting a list of commands, called a script, in a file 
to be interpreted. The first of these languages, named sh (for shell), began 
as a small collection of commands that were interpreted as calls to system 
subprograms that performed utility functions, such as file management and 
simple file filtering. To this were added variables, control f low statements, 
functions, and various other capabilities, and the result is a complete pro-
gramming language. One of the most powerful and widely known of these 
is ksh (Bolsky and Korn, 1995), which was developed by David Korn at Bell 
Laboratories.

Another scripting language is awk, developed by Al Aho, Brian Kernighan, 
and Peter Weinberger at Bell Laboratories (Aho et al., 1988). awk began as a 
report-generation language but later became a more general-purpose language.

2.18.1  Origins and Characteristics of Perl

The Perl language, developed by Larry Wall, was originally a combination 
of sh and awk. Perl has grown significantly since its beginnings and is now a 
powerful, although still somewhat primitive, programming language. Although 
it is still often called a scripting language, it is actually more similar to a typical 
imperative language, since it is always compiled, at least into an intermediate 
language, before it is executed. Furthermore, it has all the constructs to make 
it applicable to a wide variety of areas of computational problems.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   92

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.18  Scripting Languages 

  93

Perl has a number of interesting features, only a few of which are men-

tioned in this chapter and discussed later in the book.

Variables in Perl are statically typed and implicitly declared. There are 
three distinctive namespaces for variables, denoted by the first character of the 
variables’ names. All scalar variable names begin with dollar signs ($), all array 
names begin with at signs (@), and all hash names (hashes are brief ly described 
below) begin with percent signs (%). This convention makes variable names in 
programs more readable than those of most other programming languages.

Perl includes a large number of implicit variables. Some of them are used 
to store Perl parameters, such as the particular form of newline character or 
characters that are used in the implementation. Implicit variables are com-
monly used as default parameters to built-in functions and default operands 
for some operators. The implicit variables have distinctive—although cryptic—
names, such as $! and @_. The implicit variables’ names, like the user-defined 
variable names, use the three namespaces, so $! is the name of a scalar variable.
Perl’s arrays have two characteristics that set them apart from the arrays of 
the common imperative languages. First, they have dynamic length, meaning 
that they can grow and shrink as needed during execution. Second, arrays can 
be sparse, meaning that there can be gaps between the elements. These gaps do 
not take space in memory, and the iteration statement used for arrays, foreach, 
iterates over the missing elements.

Perl includes associative arrays, which are called hashes. These data struc-
tures are indexed by strings and are implicitly controlled hash tables. The Perl 
system supplies the hash function and increases the size of the structure when 
necessary.

Perl is a powerful, but somewhat dangerous, language. Its scalar type stores 
both  strings  and  numbers,  which  are  normally  stored  in  double- precision 
 f loating-point form. Depending on the context, numbers may be coerced to 
strings and vice versa. If a string is used in numeric context and the string 
cannot be converted to a number, zero is used and there is no warning or error 
message provided for the user. This can lead to errors that are not detected by 
the compiler or run-time system. Array indexing cannot be checked, because 
there is no set subscript range for any array. References to nonexistent elements 
return undef, which is interpreted as zero in numeric context. So, there is also 
no error detection in array element access.

Perl’s initial use was as a UNIX utility for processing text files. It was and 
still is widely used as a UNIX system administration tool. When the World 
Wide Web appeared, Perl achieved widespread use as a common gateway inter-
face language for use with the Web, although it is now rarely used for that 
purpose. Perl is used as a general-purpose language for a variety of applications, 
such as computational biology and artificial intelligence.
The following is an example of a Perl program:

# Perl Example Program
# Input:   An integer, $listlen, where $listlen is less
#          than 100, followed by $listlen-integer values.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   93

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
94 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

# Output:  The number of input values that are greater than
#          the average of all input values.
($sum, $result) = (0, 0);
$listlen = <STDIN>;
if (($listlen > 0) && ($listlen < 100)) {
# Read input into an array and compute the sum
  for ($counter = 0; $counter < $listlen; $counter++) {
    $intlist[$counter] = <STDIN>;
  } #- end of for (counter ... 
# Compute the average
  $average = $sum / $listlen;
# Count the input values that are > average
  foreach  $num (@intlist) {
    if ($num > $average) { $result++; }
  } #- end of foreach $num ... 
# Print result
  print "Number of values > average is: $result \n";
} #- end of if (($listlen ... 
else {
  print "Error--input list length is not legal \n";
}

2.18.2  Origins and Characteristics of JavaScript

Use of the Web exploded in the mid-1990s after the first graphical browsers 
appeared. The need for computation associated with HTML documents, which 
by themselves are completely static, quickly became critical. Computation on 
the server side was made possible with the common gateway interface (CGI), 
which allowed HTML documents to request the execution of programs on 
the server, with the results of such computations returned to the browser in 
the form of HTML documents. Computation on the browser end became 
available with the advent of Java applets. Both of these approaches have now 
been replaced for the most part by newer technologies, primarily scripting 
languages.

JavaScript was originally developed by Brendan Eich at Netscape. Its 
original name was Mocha. It was later renamed LiveScript. In late 1995, Live-
Script became a joint venture of Netscape and Sun Microsystems and its name 
was changed to JavaScript. JavaScript has gone through extensive evolution, 
moving from version 1.0 to version 1.5 by adding many new features and capa-
bilities. A language standard for JavaScript was developed in the late 1990s 
by the European Computer Manufacturers Association (ECMA) as ECMA-
262. This standard has also been approved by the International Standards 
Organization (ISO) as ISO-16262. Microsoft’s version of JavaScript is named 
JScript .NET.

Although a JavaScript interpreter could be embedded in many different 
applications, its most common use is embedded in Web browsers. JavaScript 

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   94

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.18  Scripting Languages 

  95

code  is  embedded  in  HTML  documents  and  interpreted  by  the  browser 
when the documents are displayed. The primary uses of JavaScript in Web 
programming are to validate form input data and create dynamic HTML 
documents.

In spite of its name, JavaScript is related to Java only through the use of 
similar syntax. Java is strongly typed, but JavaScript is dynamically typed (see 
Chapter 5). JavaScript’s character strings and its arrays have dynamic length. 
Because  of  this,  array  indices  are  not  checked  for  validity,  although  this 
is  required  in  Java.  Java  fully  supports  object-oriented  programming,  but  
JavaScript supports neither inheritance nor dynamic binding of method calls 
to methods.

One of the most important uses of JavaScript is for dynamically creating 
and modifying HTML documents. JavaScript defines an object hierarchy that 
matches a hierarchical model of an HTML document, which is defined by 
the Document Object Model. Elements of an HTML document are accessed 
through these objects, providing the basis for dynamic control of the elements 
of documents.

Following is a JavaScript script for the problem previously solved in several 
languages in this chapter. Note that it is assumed that this script will be called 
from an HTML document and interpreted by a Web browser.

// example.js
//   Input:  An integer, listLen, where listLen is less
//           than 100, followed by listLen-numeric values
// Output:   The number of input values that are greater
//           than the average of all input values

var intList = new Array(99);
var listLen, counter, sum = 0, result = 0;

listLen = prompt (
        "Please type the length of the input list", "");
if ((listLen > 0) && (listLen < 100)) {

// Get the input and compute its sum
   for (counter = 0; counter < listLen; counter++) {
        intList[counter] = prompt (
                        "Please type the next number", "");
        sum += parseInt(intList[counter]);
   }

// Compute the average
   average = sum / listLen;

// Count the input values that are > average
   for (counter = 0; counter < listLen; counter++)
       if (intList[counter] > average) result++;

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   95

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
96 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

// Display the results
   document.write("Number of values > average is: ",
                 result, "<br />");
}  else
    document.write(
       "Error - input list length is not legal <br />");

2.18.3  Origins and Characteristics of PHP

PHP (Tatroe et al., 2013) was developed by Rasmus Lerdorf, an employee of 
the Apache Group, in 1994. His initial motivation was to provide a tool to 
help track visitors to his personal Web site. In 1995, he developed a package 
called Personal Home Page Tools, which became the first publicly distributed 
version of PHP. Originally, PHP was an abbreviation for Personal Home Page. 
Later, its user community began using the recursive name PHP: Hypertext 
 Preprocessor, which subsequently forced the original name into obscurity. PHP 
is now developed, distributed, and supported as an open-source product. PHP 
processors are resident on most Web servers.

PHP is an HTML-embedded server-side scripting language specifically 
designed for Web applications. PHP code is interpreted on the Web server 
when an HTML document in which it is embedded has been requested by a 
browser. PHP code usually produces HTML code as output, which replaces 
the PHP code in the HTML document. Therefore, a Web browser never sees 
PHP code.

PHP is similar to JavaScript in its syntactic appearance, the dynamic nature 
of its strings and arrays, and its use of dynamic typing. PHP’s arrays are a com-
bination of JavaScript’s arrays and Perl’s hashes.

The original version of PHP did not support object-oriented program-
ming. Abstract classes, interfaces, destructors, and access controls for class 
members have since been added to the language.

PHP allows simple access to HTML form data, so form processing is easy 
with PHP. PHP provides support for many different database management 
systems. This makes it a useful language for building programs that need Web 
access to databases.

The current version of PHP is 7, released in 2015.

2.18.4  Origins and Characteristics of Python

Python (Lutz, 2013) is an object-oriented interpreted scripting language. Its 
initial design was by Guido van Rossum at Stichting Mathematisch Centrum 
in the Netherlands in the early 1990s. Its development is being continued by 
the Python Software Foundation. Python is being used for the same kinds of 
applications as Perl: system administration and other relatively small comput-
ing tasks. Python is an open-source system that is available for most common 

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   96

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.18  Scripting Languages 

  97

computing platforms. The Python implementation is available at www.python 
.org, which also has extensive information regarding Python.

Python’s syntax is not based directly on any commonly used language. It is 
type checked, but dynamically typed. Instead of arrays, Python includes three 
kinds of data structures: lists; immutable lists, which are called tuples; and 
hashes, which are called dictionaries. There is a collection of list methods, 
such as append, insert, remove, and sort, as well as a collection of methods 
for dictionaries, such as keys, values, copy, and has_key. Python also sup-
ports list comprehensions, which originated with the Haskell language. List 
comprehensions are discussed in Section 15.8.

Python is object oriented, includes the pattern-matching capabilities of 
Perl, and has exception handling. Garbage collection is used to reclaim objects 
when they are no longer needed.

Support for form processing is provided by the cgi module. Modules that 

support cookies, networking, and database access are also available.

Python includes support for concurrency with its threads, as well as sup-
port for network programming with its sockets. It also has more support for 
functional programming than other nonfunctional programming languages.

One of the more interesting features of Python is that it can be easily 
extended by any user. The modules that support the extensions can be writ-
ten in any compiled language. Extensions can add functions, variables, and 
object types. These extensions are implemented as additions to the Python 
interpreter.

2.18.5  Origins and Characteristics of Ruby

Ruby (Thomas et al., 2005) was designed by Yukihiro Matsumoto (aka Matz) in 
the early 1990s and released in 1996. Since then it has continually evolved. The 
motivation for Ruby was dissatisfaction of its designer with Perl and Python. 
Although both Perl and Python support object-oriented programming,14 nei-
ther is a pure object-oriented language, at least in the sense that each has prim-
itive (nonobject) types and each supports functions.

The  primary  characterizing  feature  of  Ruby  is  that  it  is  a  pure  object- 
oriented language, just as is Smalltalk. Every data value is an object and all 
operations are via method calls. The operators in Ruby are only syntactic mech-
anisms to specify method calls for the corresponding operations. Because they 
are methods, they can be redefined. All classes, predefined or user defined, can 
be subclassed.

Both classes and objects in Ruby are dynamic in the sense that methods can 
be dynamically added to either. This means that both classes and objects can 
have different sets of methods at different times during execution. So, different 
instantiations of the same class can behave differently. Collections of methods, 
data, and constants can be included in the definition of a class.

14.  Actually, Python’s support for object-oriented programming is partial.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   97

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
98 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

The syntax of Ruby is related to that of Eiffel and Ada. There is no need 
to declare variables, because dynamic typing is used. The scope of a variable 
is specified in its name: A variable whose name begins with a letter has local 
scope; one that begins with @ is an instance variable; one that begins with $ 
has global scope. A number of features of Perl are present in Ruby, including 
implicit variables with silly names, such as $_.

As is the case with Python, any user can extend and/or modify Ruby. Ruby 
is culturally interesting because it is the first programming language designed 
in Japan that has achieved relatively widespread use in the United States.

2.19  The Flagship .NET Language: C#

C#, along with the development platform .NET,15 was announced by Microsoft 
in 2000. In January 2002, production versions of both were released.

2.19.1  Design Process

C# is based on C++ and Java but includes some ideas from Delphi and Visual 
Basic. Its lead designer, Anders Hejlsberg, also designed Turbo Pascal and 
 Delphi, which explains the Delphi parts of the heritage of C#.

The purpose of C# is to provide a language for component-based software 
development, specifically for such development in the .NET Framework. In 
this environment, components from a variety of languages easily can be com-
bined to form systems. All of the .NET languages, which include C#, VB.NET, 
Managed C++, F#, and JScript .NET,16 use the common type system (CTS). 
The CTS provides a common class library. All types in all five .NET languages 
inherit from a single class root, System.Object. Compilers that conform to 
the CTS specification create objects that can be combined into software sys-
tems. All .NET languages are compiled into the same intermediate form, Inter-
mediate Language (IL).17 Unlike Java, however, the IL is never interpreted.  
A Just-in-Time compiler is used to translate IL into machine code before it is 
executed.

2.19.2  Language Overview

Many believe that one of Java’s most important advances over C++ lies in the 
fact that it excludes some of C++’s features. For example, C++ supports multi-
ple inheritance, pointers, structs, enum types, operator overloading, and a goto 
statement, but Java includes none of these. The designers of C# obviously 

15.  The .NET development system is brief ly discussed in Chapter 1.
16.  Many other languages have been modified to be .NET languages.
17.  Initially, IL was called MSIL (Microsoft Intermediate Language), but apparently many 

 people thought that name was too long.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   98

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.19  The Flagship .NET Language: C# 

  99

disagreed with this wholesale removal of features, because all of these except 
multiple inheritance have been included in C#.

To the credit of C#’s designers, however, in several cases, the C# version of a 
C++ feature has been improved. For example, the enum types of C# are safer than 
those of C++, because they are never implicitly converted to integers. This allows 
them to be more type safe. The struct type was changed significantly, resulting in 
a truly useful construct, whereas in C++ it serves virtually no purpose. C#’s structs 
are discussed in Chapter 12. C# takes a stab at improving the switch statement 
that is used in C, C++, and Java. C#’s switch is discussed in Chapter 8.

Although C++ includes function pointers, they share the lack of safety that 
is inherent in C++’s pointers to variables. C# includes a new type, delegates, 
which are both object-oriented and type-safe references to subprograms. Del-
egates are used for implementing event handlers, controlling the execution of 
threads, and callbacks.18 Callbacks are implemented in Java with interfaces; in 
C++, method pointers are used.

In C#, methods can take a variable number of parameters, as long as they 
are all the same type. This is specified by the use of a formal parameter of array 
type, preceded by the params reserved word.

Both C++ and Java use two distinct typing systems: one for primitives and 
one for objects. In addition to being confusing, this leads to a frequent need to 
convert values between the two systems—for example, to put a primitive value 
into a collection that stores objects. C# makes the conversion between values 
of the two typing systems partially implicit through the implicit boxing and 
unboxing operations, which are discussed in detail in Chapter 12.19

Among the other features of C# are rectangular arrays, which are not sup-
ported in most programming languages, and a foreach statement, which is an 
iterator for arrays and collection objects. A similar foreach statement is found 
in Perl, PHP, and Java 5.0. Also, C# includes properties, which are an alterna-
tive to public data members. Properties are specified as data members with get 
and set methods, which are implicitly called when references and assignments 
are made to the associated data members.

C# has evolved continuously and quickly from its initial release in 2002. 
The most recent version is C# 7.0. New in C# 7.0 are tuples and a form of 
pattern matching.

2.19.3  Evaluation

C# was meant to be an improvement over both C++ and Java as a general- 
purpose programming language. Although it can be argued that some of its 
features are a step backward, C# includes some constructs that move it beyond 
its predecessors. Some of its features will surely be adopted by other program-
ming languages of the future.

18.  When an object calls a method of another object and needs to be notified when that method 
has completed its task, the called method calls its caller back. This is known as a callback.

19.  This feature was added to Java in Java 5.0.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   99

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
 
100 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

The following is an example of a C# program:

// C# Example Program
// Input:  An integer, listlen, where listlen is less than
//         100, followed by listlen-integer values.
// Output: The number of input values that are greater
//         than the average of all input values.
using System;
public class Ch2example {
  static void Main() {
    int[] intlist;
    int listlen,
        counter,
        sum = 0,
        average,
        result = 0;
    intList = new int[99];
    listlen = Int32.Parse(Console.readLine());
    if ((listlen > 0) && (listlen < 100)) {
// Read input into an array and compute the sum
      for (counter = 0; counter < listlen; counter++) {
        intList[counter] =
                       Int32.Parse(Console.readLine());
        sum += intList[counter];
      } //- end of for (counter ... 
// Compute the average
      average = sum / listlen;
// Count the input values that are > average
      foreach (int num in intList)
        if (num > average) result++;
// Print result
      Console.WriteLine(
         "Number of values > average is:" + result);
    } //- end of if ((listlen ... 
    else
      Console.WriteLine(
         "Error--input list length is not legal");
  } //- end of method Main
} //- end of class Ch2example

2.20  Markup-Programming Hybrid Languages

A markup-programming hybrid language is a markup language in which some 
of the elements can specify programming actions, such as control f low and 
computation. The following subsections introduce two such hybrid languages, 
XSLT and JSP.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   100

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
2.20  Markup-Programming Hybrid Languages 

  101

2.20.1  XSLT

eXtensible markup language (XML) is a metamarkup language. Such a lan-
guage is used to define markup languages. XML-derived markup languages are 
used to define XML data documents. Although XML documents are human 
readable, they are processed by computers. This processing sometimes consists 
only of transformations to alternative forms that can be effectively displayed 
or printed. In many cases, such transformations are to HTML, which can be 
displayed by a Web browser. In other cases, the data in the document is pro-
cessed, just as with other forms of data files.

The transformation of XML documents to HTML documents is specified 
in another markup language, eXtensible stylesheet language transformations 
(XSLT) (www.w3.org/TR/XSLT). XSLT can specify programming-like oper-
ations. Therefore, XSLT is a markup-programming hybrid language. XSLT 
was defined by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) in the late 1990s.

An XSLT processor is a program that takes as input an XML data docu-
ment and an XSLT document (which is also in the form of an XML document). 
In this processing, the XML data document is transformed to another XML 
document,20 using the transformations described in the XSLT document. The 
XSLT document specifies transformations by defining templates, which are 
data patterns that could be found by the XSLT processor in the XML input 
file. Associated with each template in the XSLT document are its transforma-
tion instructions, which specify how the matching data is to be transformed 
before being put in the output document. So, the templates (and their associ-
ated processing) act as subprograms, which are “executed” when the XSLT 
processor finds a pattern match in the data of the XML document.

XSLT also has programming constructs at a lower level. For example, a 
looping construct is included, which allows repeated parts of the XML docu-
ment to be selected. There is also a sort process. These lower-level constructs 
are specified with XSLT tags, such as <for-each>.

2.20.2  JSP

The  “core”  part  of  the  Java  Server  Pages  Standard  Tag  Library  (JSTL)  is 
another markup-programming hybrid language, although its form and pur-
pose are different from those of XSLT. Before discussing JSTL, it is necessary 
to introduce the ideas of servlets and Java Server Pages (JSP). A servlet is an 
instance of a Java class that resides on and is executed on a Web server system. 
The execution of a servlet is requested by a markup document being displayed 
by a Web browser. The servlet’s output, which is in the form of an HTML 
document, is returned to the requesting browser. A program that runs in the 
Web server process, called a servlet container, controls the execution of serv-
lets. Servlets are commonly used for form processing and for database access.

20.  The output document of the XSLT processor could also be in HTML or plain text.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   101

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
102 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

JSP is a collection of technologies designed to support dynamic Web docu-
ments and provide other processing needs of Web documents. When a JSP docu-
ment, which is often a mixture of HTML and Java, is requested by a browser, the 
JSP processor program, which resides on a Web server system, converts the docu-
ment to a servlet. The document’s embedded Java code is copied to the servlet. The 
plain HTML is copied into Java print statements that output it as is. The JSTL 
markup in the JSP document is processed, as discussed in the following paragraph. 
The servlet produced by the JSP processor is run by the servlet container.

The JSTL defines a collection of XML action elements that control the pro-
cessing of the JSP document on the Web server. These elements have the same 
form as other elements of HTML and XML. One of the most commonly used 
JSTL control action elements is if, which specifies a Boolean expression as an 
attribute.21 The content of the if element (the text between the opening tag (<if>) 
and its closing tag (</if>)) is HTML code that will be included in the output 
document only if the Boolean expression evaluates to true. The if element is 
related to the C/C++ #if preprocessor command. The JSP container processes the 
JSTL parts of JSP documents in a way that is similar to how the C/C++ preproces-
sor processes C and C++ programs. The preprocessor commands are instructions 
for the preprocessor to specify how the output file is to be constructed from the 
input file. Similarly, JSTL control action elements are instructions for the JSP 
processor to specify how to build the XML output file from the XML input file.

One common use of the  if element is for the validation of form data 
submitted by a browser user. Form data is accessible by the JSP processor and 
can be tested with the if element to ensure that it is sensible data. If not, the 
if element can insert an error message for the user in the output document.

For multiple selection control, JSTL has choose, when, and otherwise 
elements. JSTL also includes a forEach element, which iterates over collec-
tions, which typically are form values from a client. The forEach element can 
include begin, end, and step attributes to control its iterations.

S U M M A R Y

We have investigated the development of a number of programming languages. 
This chapter gives the reader a good perspective on current issues in language 
design. We  have  set  the  stage  for  an  in-depth  discussion  of  the  important 
 features of contemporary languages.

B I B L I O G R A P H I C   N O T E S

Perhaps the most important source of historical information about the devel-
opment of early programming languages is History of Programming Languages, 
edited by Richard Wexelblat (1981). It contains the developmental background 

21.  An attribute in HTML, which is embedded in the opening tag of an element, provides 

 further information about that element.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   102

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
 
Review Questions 

  103

and  environment  of  13  important  programming  languages,  as  told  by  the 
designers themselves. A similar work resulted from a second “history” confer-
ence, published as a special issue of ACM SIGPLAN Notices (ACM, 1993a). In 
this work, the history and evolution of 13 more programming languages are 
discussed.

The paper “Early Development of Programming Languages” (Knuth and 
Pardo, 1977), which is part of the Encyclopedia of Computer Science and Technology, 
is an excellent 85-page work that details the development of languages up to 
and including Fortran. The paper includes example programs to demonstrate 
the features of many of those languages.

Another  book  of  great  interest  is  Programming  Languages:  History  and 
 Fundamentals, by Jean Sammet (1969). It is a 785-page work filled with details 
of 80 programming languages of the 1950s and 1960s. Sammet has also pub-
lished several updates to her book, such as Roster of Programming Languages for 
1974–75 (1976).

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  In what year was Plankalkül designed? In what year was that design 

published?

2.  What two common data structures were included in Plankalkül?

3.  How were the pseudocodes of the early 1950s implemented?

4.  Speedcoding was invented to overcome two significant shortcomings of 

the computer hardware of the early 1950s. What were they?

5.  Why was the slowness of interpretation of programs acceptable in the 

early 1950s?

6.  What hardware capability that first appeared in the IBM 704 computer 
strongly affected the evolution of programming languages? Explain why.

7.  In what year was the Fortran design project begun?

8.  What was the primary application area of computers at the time Fortran 

was designed?

9.  What was the source of all of the control f low statements of Fortran I?

10.  What was the most significant feature added to Fortran I to get Fortran II?

11.  What control f low statements were added to Fortran IV to get Fortran 77?

12.  Which version of Fortran was the first to have any sort of dynamic 

variables?

13.  Which version of Fortran was the first to have character string handling?
14.  Why were linguists interested in artificial intelligence in the late 1950s?
15.  Where was Lisp developed? By whom?
16.  In what way are Scheme and Common Lisp opposites of each other?
17.  What dialect of Lisp is used for introductory programming courses at 

some universities?

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   103

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
104 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

18.  What two professional organizations together designed ALGOL 60?

19.  In what version of ALGOL did block structure appear?

20.  What missing language element of ALGOL 60 damaged its chances for 

widespread use?

21.  What language was designed to describe the syntax of ALGOL 60?

22.  On what programming language was COBOL based?

23.  In what year did the COBOL design process begin?

24.  What data structure that appeared in COBOL originated with 

Plankalkül?

25.  What organization was most responsible for the early success of 

COBOL (in terms of extent of use)?

26.  What user group was the target of the first version of Basic?

27.  Why was Basic an important language in the early 1980s?

28.  PL/I was designed to replace what two languages?

29.  For what new line of computers was PL/I designed?

30.  What features of SIMULA 67 are now important parts of some  

object-oriented languages?

31.  What innovation of data structuring was introduced in ALGOL 68 but is 

often credited to Pascal?

32.  What design criterion was used extensively in ALGOL 68?

33.  What language introduced the case statement?

34.  What operators in C were modeled on similar operators in ALGOL 68?

35.  What are two characteristics of C that make it less safe than Pascal?

36.  What is a nonprocedural language?

37.  What are the two kinds of statements that populate a Prolog database?

38.  What is the primary application area for which Ada was designed?

39.  What are the concurrent program units of Ada called?

40.  What Ada construct provides support for abstract data types?

41.  What populates the Smalltalk world?

42.  What three concepts are the basis for object-oriented programming?

43.  Why does C++ include the features of C that are known to be unsafe?

44.  What language was Swift designed to replace?

45.  What do the Ada and COBOL languages have in common?

46.  What was the first application for Java?

47.  What characteristic of Java is most evident in JavaScript?
48.  How does the typing system of PHP and JavaScript differ from that of 

Java?

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   104

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
Problem Set 

  105

49.  What array structure is included in C# but not in C, C++, or Java?

50.  What two languages was the original version of Perl meant to replace?

51.  For what application area is JavaScript most widely used?

52.  What is the relationship between JavaScript and PHP, in terms of  

their use?

53.  PHP’s primary data structure is a combination of what two data 

structures from other languages?

54.  What data structure does Python use in place of arrays?

55.  What characteristic does Ruby share with Smalltalk?

56.  What characteristic of Ruby’s arithmetic operators makes them unique 

among those of other languages?

57.  What deficiency of the switch statement of C is addressed with the 

changes made by C# to that statement?

58.  What is the primary platform on which C# is used?

59.  What are the inputs to an XSLT processor?

60.  What is the output of an XSLT processor?

61.  What element of the JSTL is related to a subprogram?

62.  To what is a JSP document converted by a JSP processor?

63.  Where are servlets executed?

P R O B L E M   S E T

1.  What features of Plankalkül do you think would have had the greatest 
inf luence on Fortran 0 if the Fortran designers had been familiar with 
Plankalkül?

2.  Determine the capabilities of Backus’s 701 Speedcoding system, and 

compare them with those of a contemporary programmable hand calculator.

3.  Write a short history of the A-0, A-1, and A-2 systems designed by 

Grace Hopper and her associates.

4.  Compare the facilities of Fortran 0 with those of the Laning and Zierler 

system.

5.  Which of the three original goals of the ALGOL design committee, in 

your opinion, was most difficult to achieve at that time?

6.  Make an educated guess as to the most common syntax error in Lisp 

programs.

7.  Lisp began as a pure functional language but gradually acquired more 

and more imperative features. Why?

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   105

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
106 

  Chapter 2  

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

8.  Describe in detail the three most important reasons, in your opinion, 

why ALGOL 60 did not become a very widely used language.

9.  Why, in your opinion, did COBOL allow long identifiers when Fortran 

and ALGOL did not?

10.  Outline the major motivation of IBM in developing PL/I.

11.  Was IBM’s assumption, on which it based its decision to develop PL/I, 

correct, given the history of computers and language developments since 
1964?

12.  Describe, in your own words, the concept of orthogonality in 

programming language design.

13.  What is the primary reason why PL/I became more widely used than 

ALGOL 68?

14.  What are the arguments both for and against the idea of a typeless 

language?

15.  Are there any logic programming languages other than Prolog?

16.  What is your opinion of the argument that languages that are too 

complex are too dangerous to use, and we should therefore keep all 
languages small and simple?

17.  Do you think language design by committee is a good idea? Support 

your opinion.

18.  Languages continually evolve. What sort of restrictions do you think 

are appropriate for changes in programming languages? Compare your 
answers with the evolution of Fortran.

19.  Build a table identifying all of the major language developments, 

together with when they occurred, in what language they first appeared, 
and the identities of the developers.

20.  There have been some public interchanges between Microsoft and 

Sun concerning the design of Microsoft’s J++ and C# and Sun’s Java. 
Read some of these documents, which are available on their respective 
Web sites, and write an analysis of the disagreements concerning the 
delegates.

21.  In recent years data structures have evolved within scripting languages 

to replace traditional arrays. Explain the chronological sequence of these 
developments.

22.  Explain two reasons why pure interpretation is an acceptable 

implementation method for several recent scripting languages.

23.  Why, in your opinion, do new scripting languages appear more 

frequently than new compiled languages?

24.  Give a brief general description of a markup-programming hybrid 

language.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   106

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
 
P R O G R A M M I N G   E X E R C I S E S

Programming Exercises 

  107

1.  To understand the value of records in a programming language, write 
a small program in a C-based language that uses an array of structs 
that store student information, including name, age, GPA as a f loat, 
and grade level as a string (e.g., “freshmen,” etc.). Also, write the same 
program in the same language without using structs.

2.  To understand the value of recursion in a programming language, write 
a program that implements quicksort, first using recursion and then 
without recursion.

3.  To understand the value of counting loops, write a program that 

implements matrix multiplication using counting loop constructs. Then 
write the same program using only logical loops—for example, while 
loops.

M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   107

1/5/18   11:11 PM

 
 
 
M02_SEBE8029_12_SE_C02.indd   108

1/5/18   11:11 PM

3 

Describing Syntax 
and Semantics

3.1  Introduction

3.2  The General Problem of Describing Syntax

3.3  Formal Methods of Describing Syntax

3.4  Attribute Grammars

3.5  Describing the Meanings of Programs: Dynamic Semantics

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   109

1/5/18   11:12 PM

109

110 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

T his chapter begins by defining the terms syntax and semantics. Then, a detailed 

discussion of the most common method of describing syntax, context-free 
grammars (also known as Backus-Naur Form), is presented. Included in this 
 discussion are derivations, parse trees, ambiguity, descriptions of operator precedence 
and associativity, and extended Backus-Naur Form. Attribute grammars, which can be 
used to describe both the syntax and static semantics of programming languages, are 
discussed next. In the last section, three formal methods of describing semantics—
operational, axiomatic, and denotational semantics—are introduced. Because of the 
inherent complexity of the semantics description methods, our discussion of them is 
brief. One could easily write an entire book on just one of the three (as several authors 
have).

3.1  Introduction

The task of providing a concise yet understandable description of a program-
ming language is difficult but essential to the language’s success. ALGOL 60 
and ALGOL 68 were first presented using concise formal descriptions; in both 
cases, however, the descriptions were not easily understandable, partly because 
each used a new notation. The levels of acceptance of both languages suffered 
as a result. On the other hand, some languages have suffered the problem of 
having many slightly different dialects, a result of a simple but informal and 
imprecise definition.

One of the problems in describing a language is the diversity of the  people 
who  must  understand  the  description.  Among  these  are  initial  evaluators, 
implementors, and users. Most new programming languages are subjected to a 
period of scrutiny by potential users, often people within the organization that 
employs the language’s designer, before their designs are completed. These are 
the initial evaluators. The success of this feedback cycle depends heavily on the 
clarity of the description.

Programming language implementors obviously must be able to deter-
mine how the expressions, statements, and program units of a language are 
formed, and also their intended effect when executed. The difficulty of the 
implementors’ job is, in part, determined by the completeness and precision of 
the language description.

Finally, language users must be able to determine how to encode software 
solutions by referring to a language reference manual. Textbooks and courses 
enter into this process, but language manuals are usually the only authoritative 
printed information source about a language.

The study of programming languages, like the study of natural languages, 
can be divided into examinations of syntax and semantics. The syntax of a 
programming language is the form of its expressions, statements, and  program 
units.  Its  semantics  is  the  meaning  of  those  expressions,  statements,  and 
 program units. For example, the syntax of a Java while statement is

while (boolean_expr) statement

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   110

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
3.2  The General Problem of Describing Syntax 

  111

The semantics of this statement form is that when the current value of the 
Boolean expression is true, the embedded statement is executed. Then control 
implicitly returns to the Boolean expression to repeat the process. If the Bool-
ean expression is false, control transfers to the statement following the while 
construct.

Although  they  are  often  separated  for  discussion  purposes,  syntax  and 
semantics  are  closely  related.  In  a  well-designed  programming  language, 
semantics should follow directly from syntax; that is, the appearance of a state-
ment should strongly suggest what the statement is meant to accomplish.

Describing syntax is easier than describing semantics, partly because a con-
cise and universally accepted notation is available for syntax description, but 
none has yet been developed for semantics.

3.2  The General Problem of Describing Syntax

A language, whether natural (such as English) or artificial (such as Java), is a set 
of strings of characters from some alphabet. The strings of a language are called 
sentences or statements. The syntax rules of a language specify which strings 
of characters from the language’s alphabet are in the language. English, for 
example, has a large and complex collection of rules for specifying the syntax of 
its sentences. By comparison, even the largest and most complex programming 
languages are syntactically very simple.

Formal descriptions of the syntax of programming languages, for sim-
plicity’s sake, often do not include descriptions of the lowest-level syntactic 
units. These small units are called lexemes. The description of lexemes can 
be given by a lexical specification, which is usually separate from the syntactic 
description of the language. The lexemes of a programming language include 
its numeric literals, operators, and special words, among others. One can think 
of programs as strings of lexemes rather than of characters.

Lexemes are partitioned into groups—for example, the names of variables, 
methods, classes, and so forth in a programming language form a group called 
identifiers. Each lexeme group is represented by a name, or token. So, a token of 
a language is a category of its lexemes. For example, an identifier is a token that 
can have lexemes, or instances, such as sum and total. In some cases, a token has 
only a single possible lexeme. For example, the token for the arithmetic operator 
symbol + has just one possible lexeme. Consider the following Java statement:

index = 2 * count + 17;

The lexemes and tokens of this statement are

Lexemes
index
=
2

Tokens
identifier
equal_sign
int_literal

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   111

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
112 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

*
count
+
17
;

mult_op
identifier
plus_op
int_literal
semicolon

The example language descriptions in this chapter are very simple, and most 
include lexeme descriptions.

3.2.1  Language Recognizers

In general, languages can be formally defined in two distinct ways: by recognition 
and by generation (although neither provides a definition that is practical by 
itself for people trying to learn or use a programming language). Suppose we 
have a language L that uses an alphabet Σ of characters. To define L formally 
using the recognition method, we would need to construct a mechanism R, 
called a recognition device, capable of reading strings of characters from the 
alphabet Σ. R would indicate whether a given input string was or was not in L. 
In effect, R would either accept or reject the given string. Such devices are like 
filters, separating legal sentences from those that are incorrectly formed. If R, 
when fed any string of characters over Σ, accepts it only if it is in L, then R is a 
description of L. Because most useful languages are, for all practical purposes, 
infinite, this might seem like a lengthy and ineffective process. Recognition 
devices, however, are not used to enumerate all of the sentences of a language—
they have a different purpose.

The syntax analysis part of a compiler is a recognizer for the language the 
compiler translates. In this role, the recognizer need not test all possible strings 
of characters from some set to determine whether each is in the language. 
Rather, it need only determine whether given programs are in the language. 
In effect then, the syntax analyzer determines whether the given programs are 
syntactically correct. The structure of syntax analyzers, also known as parsers, 
is discussed in Chapter 4.

3.2.2  Language Generators

A language generator is a device that can be used to generate the sentences of a 
language. We can think of the generator as having a button that produces a sen-
tence of the language every time it is pushed. Because the particular sentence 
that is produced by a generator when its button is pushed is unpredictable, a 
generator seems to be a device of limited usefulness as a language descriptor. 
However, people prefer certain forms of generators over recognizers because 
they  can  more  easily  read  and  understand  them.  By  contrast,  the  syntax- 
checking portion of a compiler (a language recognizer) is not as useful a language 
description for a programmer because it can be used only in trial-and-error 
mode. For example, to determine the correct syntax of a particular statement 
using a compiler, the programmer can only submit a speculated version and  

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   112

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
3.3  Formal Methods of Describing Syntax 

  113

note whether the compiler accepts it. On the other hand, it is often possible to 
determine whether the syntax of a particular statement is correct by comparing 
it with the structure of the generator.

There is a close connection between formal generation and recognition 
devices for the same language. This was one of the seminal discoveries in com-
puter science, and it led to much of what is now known about formal languages 
and compiler design theory. We return to the relationship of generators and 
recognizers in the next section.

3.3  Formal Methods of Describing Syntax

This section discusses the formal language-generation mechanisms, usually 
called grammars, that are commonly used to describe the syntax of program-
ming languages.

3.3.1  Backus-Naur Form and Context-Free Grammars

In the middle to late 1950s, two men, Noam Chomsky and John Backus, in 
unrelated research efforts, developed the same syntax description formalism, 
which subsequently became the most widely used method for programming 
language syntax.

3.3.1.1  Context-Free Grammars

In the mid-1950s, Noam Chomsky, a noted linguist (among other things), 
described four classes of generative devices or grammars that define four classes 
of languages (Chomsky, 1956, 1959). Two of these grammar classes, named 
context-free and regular, turned out to be useful for describing the syntax of 
programming languages. The forms of the tokens of programming languages 
can be described by regular grammars. The syntax of whole programming 
languages, with minor exceptions, can be described by context-free grammars. 
Because Chomsky was a linguist, his primary interest was the theoretical nature 
of natural languages. He had no interest at the time in the artificial languages 
used to communicate with computers. So it was not until later that his work 
was applied to programming languages.

3.3.1.2  Origins of Backus-Naur Form

Shortly after Chomsky’s work on language classes, the ACM-GAMM group 
began designing ALGOL 58. A landmark paper describing ALGOL 58 was 
presented by John Backus, a prominent member of the ACM-GAMM group, 
at an international conference in 1959 (Backus, 1959). This paper introduced 
a  new  formal  notation  for  specifying  programming  language  syntax.  The 
new notation was later modified slightly by Peter Naur for the description of 

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   113

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
114 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

ALGOL 60 (Naur, 1960). This revised method of syntax description became 
known as Backus-Naur Form, or simply BNF.

BNF is a natural notation for describing syntax. In fact, something similar 
to BNF was used by Panini to describe the syntax of Sanskrit several hundred 
years before Christ (Ingerman, 1967).

Although the use of BNF in the ALGOL 60 report was not immediately 
accepted  by  computer  users,  it  soon  became  and  is  still  the  most  popular 
method of concisely describing programming language syntax.

It is remarkable that BNF is nearly identical to Chomsky’s generative devices 
for context-free languages, called context-free grammars. In the remain-
der of the chapter, we refer to context-free grammars simply as  grammars. 
 Furthermore, the terms BNF and grammar are used interchangeably.

3.3.1.3  Fundamentals

A metalanguage is a language that is used to describe another language. BNF 
is a metalanguage for programming languages.

BNF uses abstractions for syntactic structures. A simple Java assignment 
statement,  for  example,  might  be  represented  by  the  abstraction  <assign> 
(pointed brackets are often used to delimit names of abstractions). The actual 
definition of <assign> can be given by

<assign>  S  <var> = <expression>

The text on the left side of the arrow, which is aptly called the left-hand side 
(LHS), is the abstraction being defined. The text to the right of the arrow is 
the definition of the LHS. It is called the right-hand side (RHS) and con-
sists of some mixture of tokens, lexemes, and references to other abstractions. 
(Actually, tokens are also abstractions.) Altogether, the definition is called a 
rule, or production. In the example rule just given, the abstractions <var> 
and <expression> obviously must be defined for the <assign> definition to be 
useful.

This particular rule specifies that the abstraction <assign> is defined as 
an instance of the abstraction <var>, followed by the lexeme =, followed by an 
instance of the abstraction <expression>. One example sentence whose syntactic 
structure is described by the rule is

total = subtotal1 + subtotal2

The abstractions in a BNF description, or grammar, are often called nonter-
minal symbols, or simply nonterminals, and the lexemes and tokens of the 
rules are called terminal symbols, or simply terminals. A BNF description, 
or grammar, is a collection of rules.

Nonterminal symbols can have two or more distinct definitions, repre-
senting two or more possible syntactic forms in the language. Multiple defi-
nitions can be written as a single rule, with the different definitions separated 

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   114

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
3.3  Formal Methods of Describing Syntax 

  115

by the symbol |, meaning logical OR. For example, a Java if statement can be 
described with the rules

<if_stmt>  S  if ( <logic_expr> ) <stmt>
<if_stmt>  S  if ( <logic_expr> ) <stmt> else <stmt>

or with the rule

<if_stmt>  S  if ( <logic_expr> ) <stmt>
         | if ( <logic_expr> ) <stmt> else <stmt>

In  these  rules,  <stmt>  represents  either  a  single  statement  or  a  compound 
statement.

Although BNF is simple, it is sufficiently powerful to describe nearly all 
of the syntax of programming languages. In particular, it can describe lists of 
similar constructs, the order in which different constructs must appear, and 
nested structures to any depth, and even imply operator precedence and oper-
ator associativity.

3.3.1.4  Describing Lists

Variable-length lists in mathematics are often written using an ellipsis ( . . . );  
1, 2, . . . is an example. BNF does not include the ellipsis, so an alternative 
method is required for describing lists of syntactic elements in programming 
languages (for example, a list of identifiers appearing on a data declaration 
statement). For BNF, the alternative is recursion. A rule is recursive if its 
LHS appears in its RHS. The following rules illustrate how recursion is used 
to describe lists:

<ident_list>  S  identifier
           |  identifier, <ident_list>

This defines <ident_list> as either a single token (identifier) or an identifier 
followed by a comma and another instance of <ident_list>. Recursion is used 
to describe lists in many of the example grammars in the remainder of this 
chapter.

3.3.1.5  Grammars and Derivations

A grammar is a generative device for defining languages. The sentences of the 
language are generated through a sequence of applications of the rules, begin-
ning with a special nonterminal of the grammar called the start symbol. This 
sequence of rule applications is called a derivation. In a grammar for a com-
plete programming language, the start symbol represents a complete program 
and is often named <program>. The simple grammar shown in Example 3.1 is 
used to illustrate derivations.

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   115

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
116 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

EXAMPLE 3.1 

A Grammar for a Small Language

<program> S begin <stmt_list> end

<stmt_list> S <stmt>
                     | <stmt> ; <stmt_list>
<stmt> S <var> = <expression>
<var> S A | B | C
<expression> S <var> + <var>
                          | <var> - <var>
                          | <var>

The language described by the grammar of Example 3.1 has only one state-
ment form: assignment. A program consists of the special word  begin, fol-
lowed by a list of statements separated by semicolons, followed by the special 
word end. An expression is either a single variable or two variables separated 
by  either  a  +  or  -  operator.  The  only  variable  names  in  this  language  are  
A, B, and C.

A derivation of a program in this language follows:

<program> => begin <stmt_list> end

  => begin <stmt> ; <stmt_list> end
  => begin <var> = <expression> ; <stmt_list> end
  => begin A = <expression> ; <stmt_list> end
  => begin A = <var> + <var> ; <stmt_list> end
  => begin A = B + <var> ; <stmt_list> end
  => begin A = B + C ; <stmt_list> end
  => begin A = B + ; <stmt> end
  => begin A = B + C ; <var> = <expression> end
  => begin A = B + C ; B = <expression> end
  => begin A = B + C ; B = <var> end
  => begin A = B + C ; B = C end

This derivation, like all derivations, begins with the start symbol, in this 
case <program>. The symbol => is read “derives.” Each successive string in 
the sequence is derived from the previous string by replacing one of the non-
terminals with one of that nonterminal’s definitions. Each of the strings in the 
derivation, including <program>, is called a sentential form.

In this derivation, the replaced nonterminal is always the leftmost non-
terminal in the previous sentential form. Derivations that use this order of 
replacement are called leftmost derivations. The derivation continues until 
the sentential form contains no nonterminals. That sentential form, consisting 
of only terminals, or lexemes, is the generated sentence.

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   116

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3  Formal Methods of Describing Syntax 

  117

In addition to leftmost, a derivation may be rightmost or in an order that is 
neither leftmost nor rightmost. Derivation order has no effect on the language 
generated by a grammar.

By choosing alternative RHSs of rules with which to replace nonterminals 
in the derivation, different sentences in the language can be generated. By 
exhaustively choosing all combinations of choices, the entire language can be 
generated. This language, like most others, is infinite, so one cannot generate 
all the sentences in the language in finite time.

Example  3.2  is  another  example  of  a  grammar  for  part  of  a  typical 

 programming language.

EXAMPLE 3.2 

A Grammar for Simple Assignment Statements

<assign> S <id> = <expr>
<id> S A| B | C
<expr> S <id> + <expr>
              | <id> * <expr>
              | ( <expr>)
              | <id>

The grammar of Example 3.2 describes assignment statements whose right 
sides are arithmetic expressions with multiplication and addition operators and 
parentheses. For example, the statement

A = B * ( A + C )

is generated by the leftmost derivation:

<assign> => <id> = <expr>

  => A = <expr>
  => A = <id> * <expr>
  => A = B * <expr>
  => A = B * ( <expr>)
  => A = B * ( <id> + <expr>)
  => A = B * ( A + <expr>)
  => A = B * ( A + <id>)
  => A = B * ( A + C )

3.3.1.6  Parse Trees

One of the most attractive features of grammars is that they naturally describe 
the hierarchical syntactic structure of the sentences of the languages they define. 
These hierarchical structures are called parse trees. For example, the parse tree 
in Figure 3.1 shows the structure of the assignment statement derived previously.

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   117

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
118 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

Figure 3.1

<assign>

A parse tree for the 
simple statement  
A = B * (A + C)

<id>

=

<expr>

A

<id>

B

*

(

<expr>

<expr>

)

<id>

+

<expr>

A

<id>

C

Every internal node of a parse tree is labeled with a nonterminal  symbol; 
every  leaf  is  labeled  with  a  terminal  symbol.  Every  subtree  of  a  parse  tree 
describes one instance of an abstraction in the sentence.

3.3.1.7  Ambiguity

A grammar that generates a sentential form for which there are two or more 
distinct parse trees is said to be ambiguous. Consider the grammar shown in 
Example 3.3, which is a minor variation of the grammar shown in Example 3.2.

EXAMPLE 3.3 

An Ambiguous Grammar for Simple Assignment Statements

<assign> S <id> = <expr>
<id> S A | B | C
<expr> S <expr> + <expr>
              | <expr> * <expr>
              | ( <expr> )
              | <id>

The grammar of Example 3.3 is ambiguous because the sentence

A = B + C * A

has two distinct parse trees, as shown in Figure 3.2. The ambiguity occurs because 
the grammar specifies slightly less syntactic structure than does the grammar of 

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   118

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
3.3  Formal Methods of Describing Syntax 

  119

Figure 3.2

<assign>

<assign>

Two distinct parse trees 
for the same sentence,  
A = B + C * A

<id>

=

<expr>

<id>

=

<expr>

A

<expr>

+

<expr>

A

<expr>

*

<expr>

<id>

<expr>

*

<expr>

<expr>

+

<expr>

<id>

B

<id>

<id>

<id>

<id>

A

C

A

B

C

Example 3.2. Rather than allowing the parse tree of an expression to grow only 
on the right, this grammar allows growth on both the left and the right.

Syntactic ambiguity of language structures is a problem because compilers 
often base the semantics of those structures on their syntactic form. Specifically, 
the compiler chooses the code to be generated for a statement by examining its 
parse tree. If a language structure has more than one parse tree, then the mean-
ing of the structure cannot be determined uniquely. This problem is discussed 
in two specific examples in the following subsections.

There are several other characteristics of a grammar that are sometimes 
useful in determining whether a grammar is ambiguous.1 They include the 
following: (1) if the grammar generates a sentence with more than one leftmost 
derivation and (2) if the grammar generates a sentence with more than one 
rightmost derivation.

Some parsing algorithms can be based on ambiguous grammars. When 
such a parser encounters an ambiguous construct, it uses nongrammatical infor-
mation provided by the designer to construct the correct parse tree. In many 
cases, an ambiguous grammar can be rewritten to be unambiguous but still 
generate the desired language.

3.3.1.8  Operator Precedence

When an expression includes two different operators, for example, x + y * z, 
one obvious semantic issue is the order of evaluation of the two operators (for 
example, in this expression is it add and then multiply, or vice versa?). This 
semantic question can be answered by assigning different precedence levels to 
operators. For example, if * has been assigned higher precedence than + (by 
the language designer), multiplication will be done first, regardless of the order 
of appearance of the two operators in the expression.

1.  Note that it is mathematically impossible to determine whether an arbitrary grammar is 

ambiguous.

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   119

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
120 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

As stated previously, a grammar can describe a certain syntactic structure so 
that part of the meaning of the structure can be determined from its parse tree. 
In particular, the fact that an operator in an arithmetic expression is generated 
lower in the parse tree (and therefore must be evaluated first) can be used to 
indicate that it has precedence over an operator produced higher up in the tree. 
In the first parse tree of Figure 3.2, for example, the multiplication operator is 
generated lower in the tree, which could indicate that it has precedence over 
the addition operator in the expression. The second parse tree, however, indi-
cates just the opposite. It appears, therefore, that the two parse trees indicate 
conf licting precedence information.

Notice that although the grammar of Example 3.2 is not ambiguous, the 
precedence order of its operators is not the usual one. In this grammar, a 
parse tree of a sentence with multiple operators, regardless of the particular 
operators involved, has the rightmost operator in the expression at the lowest 
point in the parse tree, with the other operators in the tree moving progres-
sively higher as one moves to the left in the expression. For example, in the 
expression A + B * C, * is the lowest in the tree, indicating it is to be done 
first. However, in the expression A * B + C, + is the lowest, indicating it is 
to be done first.

A grammar can be written for the simple expressions we have been discuss-
ing that is both unambiguous and specifies a consistent precedence of the + and 
* operators, regardless of the order in which the operators appear in an expres-
sion. The correct ordering is specified by using separate nonterminal symbols 
to represent the operands of the operators that have different precedence. This 
requires additional nonterminals and some new rules. Instead of using <expr> 
for both operands of both + and *, we could use three nonterminals to repre-
sent operands, which allows the grammar to force different operators to differ-
ent levels in the parse tree. If <expr> is the root symbol for expressions, + can 
be forced to the top of the parse tree by having <expr> directly generate only + 
operators, using the new nonterminal, <term>, as the right operand of +. Next, 
we can define <term> to generate * operators, using <term> as the left operand 
and a new nonterminal, <factor>, as its right operand. Now, * will always be 
lower in the parse tree, simply because it is farther from the start symbol than 
+ in every derivation. The grammar of Example 3.4 is such a grammar.

EXAMPLE 3.4 

An Unambiguous Grammar for Expressions

<assign> S <id> = <expr>
<id> S A | B | C
<expr> S <expr> + <term>
              | <term>
<term> S <term> * <factor>
              | <factor>
<factor> S ( <expr> )
                | <id>

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   120

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
3.3  Formal Methods of Describing Syntax 

  121

The  grammar  in  Example  3.4  generates  the  same  language  as  the 
 grammars of Examples 3.2 and 3.3, but it is unambiguous and it specifies 
the usual precedence order of multiplication and addition operators. The 
following derivation of the sentence A = B + C * A uses the grammar of 
Example 3.4:

<assign> => <id> = <expr>

  => A = <expr>
  => A = <expr> + <term>
  => A = <term> + <term>
  => A = <factor> + <term>
  => A = <id> + <term>
  => A = B + <term>
  => A = B + <term> * <factor>
  => A = B + <factor> * <factor>
  => A = B + <id> * <factor>
  => A = B + C * <factor>
  => A = B + C * <id>
  => A = B + C * A

The unique parse tree for this sentence, using the grammar of  Example 3.4, is 
shown in Figure 3.3.

The connection between parse trees and derivations is very close: Either 
can easily be constructed from the other. Every derivation with an unambig-
uous grammar has a unique parse tree, although that tree can be represented 
by different derivations. For example, the following derivation of the sen-
tence A = B + C * A is different from the derivation of the same sentence 
given previously. This is a rightmost derivation, whereas the previous one 
is leftmost. Both of these derivations, however, are represented by the same 
parse tree.

<assign> => <id> = <expr>

  => <id> = <expr> + <term>
  => <id> = <expr> + <term> * <factor>
  => <id> = <expr> + <term> * <id>
  => <id> = <expr> + <term> * A
  => <id> = <expr> + <factor> * A
  => <id> = <expr> + <id> * A
  => <id> = <expr> + C * A
  => <id> = <term> + C * A
  => <id> = <factor> + C * A
  => <id> = <id> + C * A
  => <id> = B + C * A
  => A = B + C * A

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   121

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

Figure 3.3

<assign>

The unique parse tree 
for A = B + C * A 
using an unambiguous 
grammar

<id>

=

<expr>

A

<expr>

+

<term>

<term>

<term>

*

<factor>

<factor>

<factor>

<id>

<id>

<id>

A

B

C

3.3.1.9  Associativity of Operators

When an expression includes two operators that have the same precedence (as 
* and / usually have)—for example, A / B * C—a semantic rule is required 
to specify which should have precedence.2 This rule is named associativity.

As was the case with precedence, a grammar for expressions may correctly 
imply operator associativity. Consider the following example of an assignment 
statement:

A = B + C + A

The parse tree for this sentence, as defined with the grammar of Example 3.4, 
is shown in Figure 3.4.

The parse tree of Figure 3.4 shows the left addition operator lower than 
the right addition operator. This is the correct order if addition is meant to be 
left associative, which is typical. In most cases, the associativity of addition in 
a computer is irrelevant. In mathematics, addition is associative, which means 
that left and right associative orders of evaluation mean the same thing. That is, 
(A + B) + C = A + (B + C). Floating-point addition in a computer, however, 
is not necessarily associative. For example, suppose f loating-point values store 
seven digits of accuracy. Consider the problem of adding 11 numbers together, 
where one of the numbers is 107 and the other ten are 1. If the small numbers 
(the 1’s) are each added to the large number, one at a time, there is no effect on 
that number, because the small numbers occur in the eighth digit of the large 
number. However, if the small numbers are first added together and the result 

2.  An expression with two occurrences of the same operator has the same issue; for example,  

A / B / C.

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   122

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.4

<assign>

3.3  Formal Methods of Describing Syntax 

  123

A parse tree for  
A = B + C + A 
illustrating the  
associativity of addition

<id>

=

<expr>

A

<expr>

+

<term>

<expr>

+

<term>

<factor>

<term>

<factor>

<id>

<factor>

<id>

A

C

<id>

B

is added to the large number, the result in seven-digit accuracy is 1.000001 * 107. 
Subtraction and division are not associative, whether in mathematics or in a 
computer. Therefore, correct associativity may be essential for an expression 
that contains either of them.

When a grammar rule has its LHS also appearing at the beginning of its 
RHS, the rule is said to be left recursive. This left recursion specifies left 
associativity. For example, the left recursion of the rules of the grammar of 
Example 3.4 causes it to make both addition and multiplication left associative. 
Unfortunately, left recursion disallows the use of some important syntax analy-
sis algorithms. When one of these algorithms is to be used, the grammar must 
be modified to remove the left recursion. This, in turn, disallows the grammar 
from precisely specifying that certain operators are left associative. Fortunately, 
left associativity can be enforced by the compiler, even though the grammar 
does not dictate it.

In most languages that provide it, the exponentiation operator is right asso-
ciative. To indicate right associativity, right recursion can be used. A grammar 
rule is right recursive if the LHS appears at the right end of the RHS. Rules 
such as

<factor> S <exp> ** <factor>
                 |<exp>
<exp> S ( <expr> )
             |id

could be used to describe exponentiation as a right-associative operator.

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   123

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
124 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

3.3.1.10  An Unambiguous Grammar for if-else

The BNF rules for a Java if-else statement are as follows:

<if_stmt> S if (<logic_expr>) <stmt>
                     if (<logic_expr>) <stmt> else <stmt>

If we also have <stmt> S <if_stmt>, this grammar is ambiguous. The simplest 
sentential form that illustrates this ambiguity is

if (<logic_expr>) if (<logic_expr>) <stmt> else <stmt>

The two parse trees in Figure 3.5 show the ambiguity of this sentential form. 
Consider the following example of this construct:

if (done == true)
if (denom == 0)
    quotient = 0;
    else quotient = num / denom;

The problem is that if the upper parse tree in Figure 3.5 is used as the basis 
for translation, the else clause would be executed when done is not true, which 

Figure 3.5

<if_stmt>

Two distinct parse trees 
for the same sentential 
form

if     <logic_expr>               <stmt>     else     <stmt>

<if_stmt>

if     <logic_expr>             <stmt>

<if_stmt>

if     <logic_expr>           <stmt>     

<if_stmt>

if    <logic_expr>                   <stmt>     else     <stmt>

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   124

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
3.3  Formal Methods of Describing Syntax 

  125

probably is not what was intended by the author of the construct. We will 
examine the practical problems associated with this else-association problem 
in Chapter 8.

We will now develop an unambiguous grammar that describes this  if 
statement. The rule for if constructs in many languages is that an else clause, 
when present, is matched with the nearest previous unmatched then clause. 
Therefore, there cannot be an if statement without an else between a then 
clause and its matching else. So, for this situation, statements must be distin-
guished between those that are matched and those that are unmatched, where 
unmatched statements are else-less ifs and all other statements are matched. 
The problem with the earlier grammar is that it treats all statements as if they 
had equal syntactic significance—that is, as if they were all matched.

To ref lect the different categories of statements, different abstractions, or 
nonterminals, must be used. The unambiguous grammar based on these ideas 
follows:

<stmt> S <matched> | <unmatched>
<matched> S if (<logic_expr>) <matched> else <matched>
                     |any non-if statement
<unmatched> S if (<logic_expr>) <stmt>
                        |if (<logic_expr>) <matched> else <unmatched>

There is just one possible parse tree, using this grammar, for the following 
sentential form:

if (<logic_expr>) if (<logic_expr>) <stmt> else <stmt>

3.3.2  Extended BNF

Because of a few minor inconveniences in BNF, it has been extended in several 
ways. Most extended versions are called Extended BNF, or simply EBNF, even 
though they are not all exactly the same. The extensions do not enhance the 
descriptive power of BNF; they only increase its readability and writability.

Three extensions are commonly included in the various versions of EBNF. 
The first of these denotes an optional part of an RHS, which is delimited by 
brackets. For example, a C if-else statement can be described as

<if_stmt> S if (<expression>) <statement> [else <statement>]

Without the use of the brackets, the syntactic description of this statement 
would require the following two rules:

<if_stmt> S if (<expression>) <statement>
                   |if (<expression>) <statement> else <statement>

The second extension is the use of braces in a RHS to indicate that the enclosed 
part can be repeated indefinitely or left out altogether. This extension allows 
lists to be built with a single rule, instead of using recursion and two rules. 

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   125

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
126 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

For example, lists of identifiers separated by commas can be described by the 
following rule:

<ident_list> S <identifier> {, <identifier>}

This is a replacement of the recursion by a form of implied iteration; the part 
enclosed within braces can be iterated any number of times.

The third common extension deals with multiple-choice options. When a 
single element must be chosen from a group, the options are placed in paren-
theses and separated by the OR operator, |. For example,

<term> S <term> (* | / | %) <factor>

In BNF, a description of this <term> would require the following three rules:

<term> S <term> * <factor>
              | <term> / <factor>

              | <term> % <factor>

The brackets, braces, and parentheses in the EBNF extensions are metasym-
bols, which means they are notational tools and not terminal symbols in the 
syntactic entities they help describe. In cases where these metasymbols are 
also terminal symbols in the language being described, the instances that are 
terminal symbols can be underlined or quoted. Example 3.5 illustrates the use 
of braces and multiple choices in an EBNF grammar.

EXAMPLE 3.5 

BNF and EBNF Versions of an Expression Grammar

BNF:
     <expr> S <expr> + <term>
                  | <expr> - <term>
                  | <term>
     <term> S <term> * <factor>
                  | <term> / <factor>
                  | <factor>
     <factor> S <exp> ** <factor>
                        <exp>
     <exp> S (<expr>)
                   | id

EBNF:
     <expr> S <term> {(+ | -) <term>}
     <term> S <factor> {(* | /) <factor>}
     <factor> S <exp> { ** <exp>}
     <exp> S (<expr>)
                 | id

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   126

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
3.3  Formal Methods of Describing Syntax 

  127

The BNF rule

<expr> S <expr> + <term>

clearly specifies—in fact forces—the + operator to be left associative. However, 
the EBNF version,

<expr> S <term> {+ <term>}

does not imply the direction of associativity. This problem is overcome in a 
syntax analyzer based on an EBNF grammar for expressions by designing the 
syntax analysis process to enforce the correct associativity. This is discussed 
further in Chapter 4.

Some versions of EBNF allow a numeric superscript to be attached to the 
right brace to indicate an upper limit to the number of times the enclosed part 
can be repeated. Also, some versions use a plus (+) superscript to indicate one 
or more repetitions. For example,

<compound> S begin <stmt> {<stmt>} end

and

<compound> S begin {<stmt>}+ end

are equivalent.

In recent years, some variations on BNF and EBNF have appeared. Among 

these are the following:

•  In place of the arrow, a colon is used and the RHS is placed on the next line.

•  Instead  of  a  vertical  bar  to  separate  alternative  RHSs,  they  are  simply 

placed on separate lines.

•  In place of square brackets to indicate something being optional, the sub-

script opt is used. For example,

•  Constructor Declarator S SimpleName (FormalParameterListopt)
•  Rather than using the | symbol in a parenthesized list of elements to indi-

cate a choice, the words “one of” are used. For example,

AssignmentOperator S one of = *= /= %= += -=

<<= >>= &= ^= |=

There is a standard for EBNF, ISO/IEC 14977:1996 (1996), but it is rarely 
used. The standard uses the equal sign (=) instead of an arrow in rules, termi-
nates each RHS with a semicolon, and requires quotes on all terminal symbols. 
It also specifies a host of other notational rules.

3.3.3  Grammars and Recognizers

Earlier in this chapter, we suggested that there is a close relationship between 
generation  and  recognition  devices  for  a  given  language.  In  fact,  given  a 
 context-free grammar, a recognizer for the language generated by the grammar 

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   127

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
128 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

can be algorithmically constructed. A number of software systems have been 
developed that perform this construction. Such systems allow the quick cre-
ation  of  the  syntax  analysis  part  of  a  compiler  for  a  new  language  and  are 
therefore quite valuable. One of the first of these syntax analyzer generators is 
named yacc (yet another compiler compiler) (Johnson, 1975). There are now 
many such systems available.

3.4  Attribute Grammars

An attribute grammar is a device used to describe more of the structure of 
a programming language than can be described with a context-free grammar. 
An attribute grammar is an extension to a context-free grammar. 
The extension allows certain language rules to be conveniently 
described, such as type compatibility. Before we formally define 
the form of attribute grammars, we must clarify the concept of 
static semantics.

histor y note

Attribute grammars have been 
used in a wide variety of appli-
cations. They have been used to 
provide complete descriptions 
of the syntax and static seman-
tics of programming languages 
(Watt, 1979); they have been 
used as the formal definition of 
a language that can be input to 
a compiler generation system 
(Farrow, 1982); and they have 
been used as the basis of several 
syntax-directed editing systems 
(Teitelbaum and Reps, 1981; 
Fischer et al., 1984). In addi-
tion, attribute grammars have 
been used in natural-language 
processing systems (Correa, 
1992).

3.4.1  Static Semantics

There are some characteristics of programming languages that 
are difficult to describe with BNF, and some that are impossible. 
As an example of a syntax rule that is difficult to specify with 
BNF, consider type compatibility rules. In Java, for example, a 
f loating-point value cannot be assigned to an integer type vari-
able, although the opposite is legal. Although this restriction can 
be specified in BNF, it requires additional nonterminal symbols 
and rules. If all of the typing rules of Java were specified in BNF, 
the grammar would become too large to be useful, because the 
size of the grammar determines the size of the syntax analyzer.

As  an  example  of  a  syntax  rule  that  cannot  be  specified 
in BNF, consider the common rule that all variables must be 
declared before they are referenced. It has been proven that this 
rule cannot be specified in BNF.

These problems exemplify the categories of language rules called static 
semantics rules. The static semantics of a language is only indirectly related 
to the meaning of programs during execution; rather, it has to do with the legal 
forms of programs (syntax rather than semantics). Many static semantic rules 
of a language state its type constraints. Static semantics is so named because 
the analysis required to check these specifications can be done at compile time.
Because of the problems of describing static semantics with BNF, a variety 
of more powerful mechanisms has been devised for that task. One such mech-
anism, attribute grammars, was designed by Knuth (1968) to describe both 
the syntax and the static semantics of programs.

Attribute grammars are a formal approach both to describing and checking 
the correctness of the static semantics rules of a program. Although they are not 

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   128

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
3.4  Attribute Grammars 

  129

always used in a formal way in compiler design, the basic concepts of attribute 
grammars are at least informally used in every compiler (see Aho et al., 1988).
Dynamic semantics, which is the meaning of expressions, statements, and 

program units, is discussed in Section 3.5.

3.4.2  Basic Concepts

Attribute grammars are context-free grammars to which have been added attri-
butes, attribute computation functions, and predicate functions. Attributes, 
which are associated with grammar symbols (the terminal and nonterminal 
symbols), are similar to variables in the sense that they can have values assigned 
to them. Attribute computation functions, sometimes called semantic func-
tions, are associated with grammar rules. They are used to specify how attribute 
values are computed. Predicate functions, which state the static semantic rules 
of the language, are associated with grammar rules.

These  concepts  will  become  clearer  after  we  formally  define  attribute 

grammars and provide an example.

3.4.3  Attribute Grammars Defined

An attribute grammar is a grammar with the following additional features:

•  Associated with each grammar symbol X is a set of attributes A(X). The 
set A(X) consists of two disjoint sets S(X) and I(X), called synthesized and 
inherited attributes, respectively. Synthesized attributes are used to pass 
semantic  information  up  a  parse  tree,  while inherited  attributes  pass 
semantic information down and across a tree.

•  Associated  with  each  grammar  rule  is  a  set  of  semantic  functions  and 
a  possibly  empty  set  of  predicate  functions  over  the  attributes  of  the 
symbols  in  the  grammar  rule.  For  a  rule  the  X0 S X1  c Xn,  synthe-
sized attributes of X0 are computed with semantic functions of the form 
S(X0) = f(A(X1),  c, A(Xn)). So the value of a synthesized attribute on 
a  parse  tree  node  depends  only  on  the  values  of  the  attributes  on  that 
node’s  children  nodes.  Inherited  attributes  of  symbols  Xj, 1 … j … n 
(in the rule above), are computed with a semantic function of the form 
I(Xj = f(A(X0),  c, A(Xn)).  So  the  value  of  an  inherited  attribute  on 
a  parse  tree  node  depends  on  the  attribute  values  of  that  node’s  par-
ent  node  and  those  of  its  sibling  nodes.  Note  that,  to  avoid  circular-
ity,  inherited  attributes  are  often  restricted  to  functions  of  the  form 
I(Xj) = f(A(X0),  c, A(X(j - 1))). This form prevents an inherited attribute 
from depending on itself or on attributes to the right in the parse tree.
•  A predicate function has the form of a Boolean expression on the union of the 
attribute set {A(X0),  c, A(Xn)} and a set of literal attribute values. The only 
derivations allowed with an attribute grammar are those in which every predi-
cate associated with every nonterminal is true. A false predicate function value 
indicates a violation of the syntax or static semantics rules of the language.

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   129

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
130 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

A parse tree of an attribute grammar is the parse tree based on its  underlying 
BNF grammar, with a possibly empty set of attribute values attached to each 
node. If all the attribute values in a parse tree have been computed, the tree is 
said to be fully attributed. Although in practice it is not always done this way, it 
is convenient to think of attribute values as being computed after the complete 
unattributed parse tree has been constructed by the compiler.

3.4.4 

Intrinsic Attributes

Intrinsic attributes are synthesized attributes of leaf nodes whose values are 
determined outside the parse tree. For example, the type of an instance of a 
variable in a program could come from the symbol table, which is used to 
store variable names and their types. The contents of the symbol table are set 
based on earlier declaration statements. Initially, assuming that an unattributed 
parse tree has been constructed and that attribute values are needed, the only 
attributes with values are the intrinsic attributes of the leaf nodes. Given the 
intrinsic attribute values on a parse tree, the semantic functions can be used to 
compute the remaining attribute values.

3.4.5  Examples of Attribute Grammars

As a very simple example of how attribute grammars can be used to describe 
static semantics, consider the following fragment of an attribute grammar that 
describes the rule that the name on the end of an Ada procedure must match 
the procedure’s name. (This rule cannot be stated in BNF.) The string attribute 
of <proc_name>, denoted by <proc_name>.string, is the actual string of char-
acters that were found immediately following the reserved word  procedure 
by the compiler. Notice that when there is more than one occurrence of a 
nonterminal in a syntax rule in an attribute grammar, the nonterminals are 
subscripted with brackets to distinguish them. Neither the subscripts nor the 
brackets are part of the described language.

Syntax rule: <proc_def> S procedure <proc_name>[1]

      <proc_body> end <proc_name>[2];

Predicate:    <proc_name>[1]string == <proc_name>[2].string

In this example, the predicate rule states that the name string attribute of the 
<proc_name> nonterminal in the subprogram header must match the name string 
attribute of the <proc_name> nonterminal following the end of the subprogram.
Next, we consider a larger example of an attribute grammar. In this case, 
the example illustrates how an attribute grammar can be used to check the type 
rules of a simple assignment statement. The syntax and static semantics of this 
assignment statement are as follows: The only variable names are A, B, and C.  
The right side of the assignments can be either a variable or an expression in 
the form of a variable added to another variable. The variables can be one of 
two types: int or real. When there are two variables on the right side of an 
assignment, they need not be the same type. The type of the expression when 

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   130

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.4  Attribute Grammars 

  131

the operand types are not the same is always real. When they are the same, the 
expression type is that of the operands. The type of the left side of the assign-
ment must match the type of the right side. So the types of operands in the 
right side can be mixed, but the assignment is valid only if the target and the 
value resulting from evaluating the right side have the same type. The attribute 
grammar specifies these static semantic rules.

The syntax portion of our example attribute grammar is

<assign> S <var> = <expr>
<expr> S <var> + <var>
              | <var>
<var> S A | B | C

The attributes for the nonterminals in the example attribute grammar are 

described in the following paragraphs:

•  actual_type—A synthesized attribute associated with the nonterminals <var> 
and <expr>. It is used to store the actual type, int or real, of a variable or 
expression. In the case of a variable, the actual type is intrinsic. In the case 
of an expression, it is determined from the actual types of the child node 
or children nodes of the <expr> nonterminal.

•  expected_type—An  inherited  attribute  associated  with  the  nonterminal 
<expr>. It is used to store the type, either int or real, that is expected for 
the expression, as determined by the type of the variable on the left side of 
the assignment statement.

The complete attribute grammar follows in Example 3.6.

EXAMPLE 3.6 

An Attribute Grammar for Simple Assignment Statements

1.  Syntax rule: <assign> S <var> = <expr>

Semantic rule: <expr>.expected_type d <var>.actual_type

2.  Syntax rule: <expr> S <var>[2] + <var>[3]
Semantic rule: <expr>.actual_type d

if (<var>[2].actual_type = int) and
  (<var>[3].actual_type = int)

then int

  else real
  end if

Predicate:        <expr>.actual_type == <expr>.expected_type

3.  Syntax rule:     <expr> S <var>

Semantic rule: <expr>.actual_type d <var>.actual_type
Predicate:        <expr>.actual_type == <expr>.expected_type

4.  Syntax rule:     <var> S A | B | C

Semantic rule: <var>.actual_type d look-up(<var>.string)

The look-up function looks up a given variable name in the symbol table and 
returns the variable’s type.

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   131

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
132 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

A parse tree of the sentence A  =  A  +  B generated by the grammar in 
Example 3.6 is shown in Figure 3.6. As in the grammar, bracketed numbers 
are added after the repeated node labels in the tree so they can be referenced 
unambiguously.

3.4.6  Computing Attribute Values

Now, consider the process of computing the attribute values of a parse tree, 
which is sometimes called decorating the parse tree. If all attributes were 
inherited, this could proceed in a completely top-down order, from the root 
to the leaves. Alternatively, it could proceed in a completely bottom-up order, 
from the leaves to the root, if all the attributes were synthesized. Because our 
grammar has both synthesized and inherited attributes, the evaluation process 
cannot be in any single direction. The following is an evaluation of the attri-
butes, in an order in which it is possible to compute them:

1.  <var>.actual_type d look-up(A) (Rule 4)
2.  <expr>.expected_type d <var>.actual_type (Rule 1)
3.  <var>[2].actual_type d look-up(A) (Rule 4)
<var>[3].actual_type d look-up(B) (Rule 4)
4.  <expr>.actual_type d either int or real (Rule 2)
5.  <expr>.expected_type == <expr>.actual_type is either

  TRUE or FALSE (Rule 2)

The tree in Figure 3.7 shows the f low of attribute values in the example 
of Figure 3.6. Solid lines show the parse tree; dashed lines show attribute f low 
in the tree.

The tree in Figure 3.8 shows the final attribute values on the nodes. In this 

example, A is defined as a real and B is defined as an int.

Determining attribute evaluation order for the general case of an attribute 
grammar is a complex problem, requiring the construction of a dependency 
graph to show all attribute dependencies.

Figure 3.6 

A parse tree for  
A = A + B

<assign>

<expr>

<var>

<var>[2]

<var>[3]

A

=

A

+

B

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   132

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.7

The flow of attributes  
in the tree

<assign>

3.4  Attribute Grammars 

  133

expected_type

<expr>

actual_type

actual_type

<var>

actual_type

actual_type

<var>[2]

<var>[3]

A

=

A

+

B

Figure 3.8

A fully attributed parse 
tree

<assign>

<expr>

expected_type = real_type
actual_type = real_type

actual_type =
real_type

<var>

<var>[2]

actual_type =
real_type

<var>[3]

actual_type =
int_type

A

=

A

+

B

3.4.7  Evaluation

Checking the static semantic rules of a language is an essential part of all com-
pilers. Even if a compiler writer has never heard of an attribute grammar, he or 
she would need to use the fundamental ideas of attribute grammars to design 
the checks of static semantics rules for his or her compiler.

One of the main difficulties in using an attribute grammar to describe all of 
the syntax and static semantics of a real contemporary programming  language 
is the size and complexity of the attribute grammar. The large number of attri-
butes and semantic rules required for a complete programming language make 
such grammars difficult to write and read. Furthermore, the attribute values on 
a large parse tree are costly to evaluate. On the other hand, less formal attribute 

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   133

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
134 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

grammars are a powerful and commonly used tool for compiler writers, who 
are more interested in the process of producing a compiler than they are in 
formalism.

3.5  Describing the Meanings of Programs: Dynamic Semantics

We now turn to the difficult task of describing the dynamic semantics, or 
meaning, of the expressions, statements, and program units of a programming 
language.  Because  of  the  power  and  naturalness  of  the  available  notation, 
describing syntax is a relatively simple matter. On the other hand, no univer-
sally accepted notation or approach has been devised for dynamic semantics. In 
this section, we brief ly describe several of the methods that have been devel-
oped. For the remainder of this section, when we use the term semantics, we 
mean dynamic semantics.

There are several different reasons underlying the need for a methodology 
and notation for describing semantics. Programmers obviously need to know 
precisely what the statements of a language do before they can use them effec-
tively in their programs. Compiler writers must know exactly what language 
constructs mean to design implementations for them correctly. If there were a 
precise semantics specification of a programming language, programs written 
in the language potentially could be proven correct without testing. Also, com-
pilers could be shown to produce programs that exhibited exactly the behavior 
given in the language definition; that is, their correctness could be verified. A 
complete specification of the syntax and semantics of a programming language 
could be used by a tool to generate a compiler for the language automatically. 
Finally, language designers, who would develop the semantic descriptions of 
their languages, could in the process discover ambiguities and inconsistencies 
in their designs.

Software  developers  and  compiler  designers  typically  determine  the 
semantics of programming languages by reading English explanations in lan-
guage manuals. Because such explanations are often imprecise and incomplete, 
this approach is clearly unsatisfactory. Due to the lack of complete semantics 
specifications of programming languages, programs are rarely proven correct 
without testing, and commercial compilers are never generated automatically 
from language descriptions.

Scheme, a functional language described in Chapter 15, is one of only 
a few programming languages whose definition includes a formal semantics 
description. However, the method used is not one described in this chapter, as 
this chapter is focused on approaches that are suitable for imperative languages.

3.5.1  Operational Semantics

The idea behind operational semantics is to describe the meaning of a state-
ment or program by specifying the effects of running it on a machine. The 
effects on the machine are viewed as the sequence of changes in its state, where 

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   134

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
3.5  Describing the Meanings of Programs: Dynamic Semantics 

  135

the machine’s state is the collection of the values in its storage. An obvious 
operational semantics description, then, is given by executing a compiled ver-
sion of the program on a computer. Most programmers have, on at least one 
occasion, written a small test program to determine the meaning of some pro-
gramming language construct, often while learning the language. Essentially, 
what such a programmer is doing is using operational semantics to determine 
the meaning of the construct.

There are several problems with using this approach for complete for-
mal semantics descriptions. First, the individual steps in the execution of 
machine language and the resulting changes to the state of the machine are 
too small and too numerous. Second, the storage of a real computer is too 
large and complex. There are usually several levels of memory devices, as 
well as connections to enumerable other computers and memory devices 
through networks. Therefore, machine languages and real computers are not 
used for formal operational semantics. Rather, intermediate-level languages 
and interpreters for idealized computers are designed specifically for the 
process.

There are different levels of uses of operational semantics. At the highest 
level, the interest is in the final result of the execution of a complete program. 
This is sometimes called natural operational semantics. At the lowest level, 
operational semantics can be used to determine the precise meaning of a pro-
gram through an examination of the complete sequence of state changes that 
occur when the program is executed. This use is sometimes called structural 
operational semantics.

3.5.1.1  The Basic Process

The first step in creating an operational semantics description of a language 
is to design an appropriate intermediate language, where the primary desired 
characteristic of the language is clarity. Every construct of the intermediate 
language must have an obvious and unambiguous meaning. This language is at 
the intermediate level, because machine language is too low-level to be easily 
understood and another high-level language is obviously not suitable. If the 
semantics description is to be used for natural operational semantics, a virtual 
machine (an interpreter) must be constructed for the intermediate language. 
The virtual machine can be used to execute either single statements, code 
segments, or whole programs. The semantics description can be used without 
a virtual machine if the meaning of a single statement is all that is required. In 
this use, which is structural operational semantics, the intermediate code can 
be visually inspected.

The basic process of operational semantics is not unusual. In fact, the con-
cept is frequently used in programming textbooks and programming language 
reference manuals. For example, the semantics of the C for construct can be 
described in terms of simpler statements, as in

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   135

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
136 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

C Statement

Meaning

for (expr1; expr2; expr3) {

  expr1;

. . .

}

loop: if expr2 == 0 goto out

  . . .
  expr3;
  goto loop

out: 

. . .

The human reader of such a description is the virtual computer and is assumed 
to be able to “execute” the instructions in the definition correctly and recognize 
the effects of the “execution.”

The intermediate language and its associated virtual machine used for for-
mal operational semantics descriptions are often highly abstract. The interme-
diate language is meant to be convenient for the virtual machine, rather than 
for human readers. For our purposes, however, a more human-oriented inter-
mediate language could be used. As such an example, consider the following 
list of statements, which would be adequate for describing the semantics of the 
simple control statements of a typical programming language:

ident = var
ident = ident + 1
ident = ident – 1
goto label
if var relop var goto label

In these statements, relop is one of the relational operators from the set {=, 
<>, >, <, <=, <=}, ident is an identifier, and var is either an identifier or 
a constant. These statements are all simple and therefore easy to understand 
and implement.

A slight generalization of these three assignment statements allows more 
general arithmetic expressions and assignment statements to be described. The 
new statements are

ident = var bin_op var
ident = un_op var

where bin_op is a binary arithmetic operator and un_op is a unary operator. Mul-
tiple arithmetic data types and automatic type conversions, of course, complicate 
this generalization. Adding just a few more relatively simple instructions would 
allow the semantics of arrays, records, pointers, and subprograms to be described.
In Chapter 8, the semantics of various control statements are described 

using this intermediate language.

3.5.1.2  Evaluation

The  first  and  most  significant  use  of  formal  operational  semantics  was  to 
describe  the  semantics  of  PL/I  (Wegner,  1972).  That  particular  abstract 
machine and the translation rules for PL/I were together named the Vienna 
Definition Language (VDL), after the city where IBM designed it.

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   136

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.5  Describing the Meanings of Programs: Dynamic Semantics 

  137

Operational semantics provides an effective means of describing semantics 
for language users and language implementors, as long as the descriptions are 
kept simple and informal. The VDL description of PL/I, unfortunately, is so 
complex that it serves no practical purpose.

Operational  semantics  depends  on  programming  languages  of  lower 
levels, not mathematics. The statements of one programming language are 
described in terms of the statements of a lower-level programming language. 
This approach can lead to circularities, in which concepts are indirectly defined 
in terms of themselves. The methods described in the following two sections 
are much more formal, in the sense that they are based on mathematics and 
logic, not programming languages.

3.5.2  Denotational Semantics

Denotational semantics is the most rigorous and most widely known formal 
method for describing the meaning of programs. It is solidly based on recursive 
function theory. A thorough discussion of the use of denotational semantics to 
describe the semantics of programming languages is necessarily long and com-
plex. It is our intent to provide the reader with an introduction to the central 
concepts of denotational semantics, along with a few simple examples that are 
relevant to programming language specifications.

The process of constructing a denotational semantics specification for 
a programming language requires one to define for each language entity 
both  a  mathematical  object  and  a  function  that  maps  instances  of  that 
language  entity  onto  instances  of  the  mathematical  object.  Because  the 
objects are rigorously defined, they model the exact meaning of their cor-
responding entities. The idea is based on the fact that there are rigorous 
ways of manipulating mathematical objects but not programming language 
constructs.  The  difficulty  with  this  method  lies  in  creating  the  objects 
and the mapping functions. The method is named denotational because the 
mathematical objects denote the meaning of their corresponding syntactic 
entities.

The mapping functions of a denotational semantics programming lan-
guage specification, like all functions in mathematics, have a domain and a 
range. The domain is the collection of values that are legitimate parameters 
to the function; the range is the collection of objects to which the parameters 
are mapped. In denotational semantics, the domain is called the syntactic 
domain, because it is syntactic structures that are mapped. The range is called 
the semantic domain.

Denotational semantics is related to operational semantics. In oper-
ational  semantics,  programming  language  constructs  are  translated  into 
simpler programming language constructs, which become the basis of the 
meaning of the construct. In denotational semantics, programming lan-
guage constructs are mapped to mathematical objects, either sets or, more 
often,  functions.  However,  unlike  operational  semantics,  denotational 
semantics  does  not  model  the  step-by-step  computational  processing  of 
programs.

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   137

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
138 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

3.5.2.1  Two Simple Examples

We use a very simple language construct, character string representations of 
binary numbers, to introduce the denotational method. The syntax of such 
binary numbers can be described by the following grammar rules:

<bin_num>  S  '0'
  | '1'

  | <bin_num> '0'

  | <bin_num> '1'

A parse tree for the example binary number, 110, is shown in Figure 3.9. Notice 
that we put apostrophes around the syntactic digits to show they are not mathe-
matical digits. This is similar to the relationship between ASCII coded digits and 
mathematical digits. When a program reads a number as a string, it must be con-
verted to a mathematical number before it can be used as a value in the program.

Figure 3.9

A parse tree of the 
binary number 110

<bin_num>

<bin_num>

'0'

<bin_num>

'1'

'1'

The syntactic domain of the mapping function for binary numbers is the 
set of all character string representations of binary numbers. The semantic 
domain is the set of nonnegative decimal numbers, symbolized by N.

To describe the meaning of binary numbers using denotational semantics, 
we associate the actual meaning (a decimal number) with each rule that has a 
single terminal symbol as its RHS.

In our example, decimal numbers must be associated with the first two 
grammar rules. The other two grammar rules are, in a sense, computational 
rules, because they combine a terminal symbol, to which an object can be asso-
ciated, with a nonterminal, which can be expected to represent some construct. 
Presuming an evaluation that progresses upward in the parse tree, the nonter-
minal in the right side would already have its meaning attached. So, a syntax 
rule with a nonterminal as its RHS would require a function that computed 
the meaning of the LHS, which represents the meaning of the complete RHS.
The semantic function, named Mbin, maps the syntactic objects, as described 
in the previous grammar rules, to the objects in N, the set of non-negative dec-
imal numbers. The function Mbin is defined as follows:

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   138

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.5  Describing the Meanings of Programs: Dynamic Semantics 

  139

Mbin ('0') = 0
Mbin ('1') = 1
Mbin (<bin_num> '0') = 2 * Mbin (<bin_num>)
Mbin (<bin_num>'1') = 2 * Mbin (<bin_num>) + 1

The meanings, or denoted objects (which in this case are decimal numbers), can 
be attached to the nodes of the parse tree shown on the previous page, yielding 
the tree in Figure 3.10. This is syntax-directed semantics. Syntactic entities are 
mapped to mathematical objects with concrete meaning.

Figure 3.10

A parse tree with 
denoted objects for 110

6
<bin_num>

3
<bin_num>

'0'

1
<bin_num>

'1'

'1'

In part because we need it later, we now show a similar example for describ-
ing the meaning of syntactic decimal literals. In this case, the syntactic domain 
is the set of character string representations of decimal numbers. The semantic 
domain is once again the set N.

<dec_num> S '0'|'1'|'2'|'3'|'4'|'5'|'6'|'7''8'|'9'

  |<dec_num> ('0'|'1'|'2'|'3'|'4'|'5'|'6'|'7'|'8'|'9')

The denotational mappings for these syntax rules are

Mdec ('0')  = 0, Mdec ('1')  = 1, Mdec ('2') = 2, . . ., Mdec ('9') = 9
Mdec (<dec_num> '0')  = 10 * Mdec (<dec_num>)
Mdec (<dec_num> '1')  = 10 * Mdec (<dec_num>) + 1
. . .
Mdec (<dec_num> '9')  = 10 * Mdec (<dec_num>) + 9

In the following sections, we present the denotational semantics descrip-
tions of a few simple constructs. The most important simplifying assumption 
made here is that both the syntax and static semantics of the constructs are 
correct. In addition, we assume that only two scalar types are included: integer 
and Boolean.

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   139

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
140 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

3.5.2.2  The State of a Program

The denotational semantics of a program could be defined in terms of state 
changes in an ideal computer. Operational semantics are defined in this way, 
and denotational semantics are defined in nearly the same way. In a further 
simplification, however, denotational semantics is defined in terms of only 
the values of all of the program’s variables. So, denotational semantics uses 
the state of the program to describe meaning, whereas operational semantics 
uses the state of a machine. The key difference between operational seman-
tics and denotational semantics is that state changes in operational semantics 
are defined by coded algorithms, written in some programming language, 
whereas in denotational semantics, state changes are defined by mathematical 
functions.

Let the state s of a program be represented as a set of ordered pairs, as 

follows:

s = { 6 i1, v1 7 , 6 i2, v2 7 ,  c, 6 in, vn 7 }

Each i is the name of a variable, and the associated v’s are the current values 
of those variables. Any of the v’s can have the special value undef, which indi-
cates that its associated variable is currently undefined. Let VARMAP be a 
function of two parameters: a variable name and the program state. The value 
of  VARMAP (ij, s) is  vj (the value paired with ij in state s). Most semantics 
mapping functions for programs and program constructs map states to states. 
These state changes are used to define the meanings of programs and program 
constructs. Some language constructs—for example, expressions—are mapped 
to values, not states.

3.5.2.3  Expressions

Expressions are fundamental to most programming languages. We assume here 
that expressions have no side effects. Furthermore, we deal with only very sim-
ple expressions: The only operators are + and *, and an expression can have at 
most one operator; the only operands are scalar integer variables and integer 
literals; there are no parentheses; and the value of an expression is an integer. 
Following is the BNF description of these expressions:

<expr> S <dec_num> | <var> | <binary_expr>
<binary_expr> S <left_expr> <operator> <right_expr>
<left_expr> S <dec_num> | <var>
<right_expr> S <dec_num> | <var>
<operator> S + | *

The only error we consider in expressions is a variable having an undefined value. 
Obviously, other errors can occur, but most of them are machine- dependent. 
Let Z be the set of integers, and let error be the error value. Then Zh {error} 
is the semantic domain for the denotational specification for our expressions.

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   140

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
3.5  Describing the Meanings of Programs: Dynamic Semantics 

  141

The mapping function for a given expression E and state s follows. To 
distinguish  between  mathematical  function  definitions  and  the  assignment 
statements of programming languages, we use the symbol ∆ = to define math-
ematical functions. The implication symbol, =>, used in this definition con-
nects the form of an operand with its associated case (or switch) construct. 
Dot  notation  is  used  to  refer  to  the  child  nodes  of  a  node.  For  example,  
<binary_expr>.<left_expr> refers to the left child node of <binary_expr>.

Me(<expr>, s) ∆= case <expr> of

  <dec_num>=> Mdec (<dec_num>, s)
  <var> =>if VARMAP (<var>, s) == undef

then error

  else VARMAP(<var>, s)

  <binary_expr> =>

if(Me (<binary_expr>.<left_expr>,s) == undef OR
  Me (<binary_expr>.<right_expr>, s) == undef)
then error

  else if (<binary_expr>.<operator> == '+')

  then Me (<binary_expr>.<left_expr>, s) +
  Me (<binary_expr>.<right_expr>, s)
  else Me (<binary_expr>.<left_expr>, s) *
    Me (<binary_expr>.<right_expr>, s)

3.5.2.4  Assignment Statements

An assignment statement is an expression evaluation plus the setting of the 
target variable to the expression’s value. In this case, the meaning function maps 
a state to a state. This function can be described with the following:

Ma (x = E, s) ∆= if Me (E, s) == error

then error

                else s' = {<i1, v1′ >, <i2, v2′>, . . . , <in, vn′>}, where

for j = 1, 2, . . . , n
if ij == x

then vj′ = Me (E, s)

  else vj′ = VARMAP(ij,, s)

Note that the comparison in the third last line above, ij == x, is of names, not 
values.

3.5.2.5  Logical Pretest Loops

The denotational semantics of a logical pretest loop is deceptively simple. To 
expedite the discussion, we assume that there are two other existing mapping 
functions, Msl and Mb, that map statement lists and states to states and Boolean 
expressions to Boolean values (or error), respectively. The function is

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   141

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
142 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

M1 (while B do L, s) ∆= if Mb (B, s) == undef

then error

  else if Mb (B, s) == false

then s

  else if Msl (L, s) == error

then error

     else M1 (while B do L, Msl (L, s))

The meaning of the loop is simply the value of the program variables after the 
statements in the loop have been executed the prescribed number of times, 
assuming there have been no errors. In essence, the loop has been converted 
from iteration to recursion, where the recursion control is mathematically 
defined  by  other  recursive  state  mapping  functions.  Recursion  is  easier  to 
describe with mathematical rigor than iteration.

One significant observation at this point is that this definition, like actual 

program loops, may compute nothing because of nontermination.

3.5.2.6  Evaluation

Objects and functions, such as those used in the earlier constructs, can be defined 
for the other syntactic entities of programming languages. When a complete sys-
tem has been defined for a given language, it can be used to determine the meaning 
of complete programs in that language. This provides a framework 
for thinking about programming in a highly rigorous way.

histor y note

A significant amount of work 
has been done on the possibility 
of using denotational language 
descriptions to generate compil-
ers automatically (Jones, 1980; 
Milos et al., 1984;  Bodwin 
et al., 1982). These efforts 
have shown that the method is 
feasible, but the work has never 
progressed to the point where it 
can be used to generate useful 
compilers.

As stated previously, denotational semantics can be used as 
an aid to language design. For example, statements for which 
the denotational semantic description is complex and difficult 
may indicate to the designer that such statements may also be 
difficult for language users to understand and that an alternative 
design may be in order.

Because of the complexity of denotational descriptions, they 
are of little use to language users. On the other hand, they pro-
vide an excellent way to describe a language concisely.

Although  the  use  of  denotational  semantics  is  normally 
attributed to Scott and Strachey (1971), the general denotational 
approach to language description can be traced to the nineteenth 
century (Frege, 1892).

3.5.3  Axiomatic Semantics

Axiomatic semantics, thus named because it is based on mathematical logic, is 
the most abstract approach to semantics specification discussed in this chapter. 
Rather than directly specifying the meaning of a program, axiomatic semantics 
specifies what can be proven about the program. Recall that one of the possible 
uses of semantic specifications is to prove the correctness of programs.

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   142

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.5  Describing the Meanings of Programs: Dynamic Semantics 

  143

In axiomatic semantics, there is no model of the state of a machine or pro-
gram or model of state changes that take place when the program is executed. 
The meaning of a program is based on relationships among program variables 
and constants, which are the same for every execution of the program.

Axiomatic semantics has two distinct applications: program verification and 
program semantics specification. This section focuses on program verification 
in its description of axiomatic semantics.

Axiomatic semantics was defined in conjunction with the development of 
an approach to proving the correctness of programs. Such correctness proofs, 
when they can be constructed, show that a program performs the computation 
described by its specification. In a proof, each statement of a program is both 
preceded and followed by a logical expression that specifies constraints on pro-
gram variables. These, rather than the entire state of an abstract machine (as 
with operational semantics), are used to specify the meaning of the statement. 
The notation used to describe constraints—indeed, the language of axiomatic 
semantics—is predicate calculus.  Although simple Boolean expressions are 
often adequate to express constraints, in some cases they are not.

When axiomatic semantics is used to specify formally the meaning of a 
statement, the meaning is defined by the statement’s effect on assertions about 
the data affected by the statement.

3.5.3.1  Assertions

The logical expressions used in axiomatic semantics are called predicates, or asser-
tions. An assertion immediately preceding a program statement describes the 
constraints on the program variables at that point in the program. An assertion 
immediately following a statement describes the new constraints on those variables 
(and possibly others) after execution of the statement. These assertions are called 
the precondition and postcondition, respectively, of the statement. For two adja-
cent statements, the postcondition of the first serves as the precondition of the 
second. Developing an axiomatic description or proof of a given program requires 
that every statement in the program has both a precondition and a postcondition.
In the following sections, we examine assertions from the point of view 
that preconditions for statements are computed from given postconditions, 
although it is possible to consider these in the opposite sense. We assume all 
variables are integer type. As a simple example, consider the following assign-
ment statement and postcondition:

sum = 2 * x + 1 {sum > 1}

Precondition and postcondition assertions are presented in braces to distin-
guish them from parts of program statements. One possible precondition for 
this statement is {x > 10}.

In axiomatic semantics, the meaning of a specific statement is defined by 
its precondition and its postcondition. In effect, the two assertions specify pre-
cisely the effect of executing the statement.

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   143

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
144 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

In the following subsections, we focus on correctness proofs of statements 
and programs, which is a common use of axiomatic semantics. The more gen-
eral concept of axiomatic semantics is to state precisely the meaning of state-
ments and programs in terms of logic expressions. Program verification is one 
application of axiomatic descriptions of languages.

3.5.3.2  Weakest Preconditions

The weakest precondition is the least restrictive precondition that will guaran-
tee the validity of the associated postcondition. For example, in the statement and 
postcondition given in Section 3.5.3.1, {x > 10}, {x > 50}, and {x > 1000} are 
all valid preconditions. The weakest of all preconditions in this case is {x > 0}.

If  the  weakest  precondition  can  be  computed  from  the  most  general 
postcondition for each of the statement types of a language, then the pro-
cesses used to compute these preconditions provide a concise description of 
the semantics of that language. Furthermore, correctness proofs can be con-
structed for programs in that language. A program proof is begun by using the 
characteristics of the results of the program’s execution as the postcondition 
of the last statement of the program. This postcondition, along with the last 
statement, is used to compute the weakest precondition for the last statement. 
This precondition is then used as the postcondition for the second last state-
ment. This process continues until the beginning of the program is reached. 
At that point, the precondition of the first statement states the conditions 
under which the program will compute the desired results. If these conditions 
are implied by the input specification of the program, the program has been 
verified to be correct.

An inference rule is a method of inferring the truth of one assertion on 
the basis of the values of other assertions. The general form of an inference 
rule is as follows:

S1, S2,  c, Sn
S

This rule states that if S1, S2, . . . , and Sn are true, then the truth of S can be 
inferred. The top part of an inference rule is called its antecedent; the bottom 
part is called its consequent.

An axiom is a logical statement that is assumed to be true. Therefore, an 

axiom is an inference rule without an antecedent.

For some program statements, the computation of a weakest precondition 
from the statement and a postcondition is simple and can be specified by an 
axiom. In most cases, however, the weakest precondition can be specified only 
by an inference rule.

To  use  axiomatic  semantics  with  a  given  programming  language, 
whether for correctness proofs or for formal semantics specifications, either 
an axiom or an inference rule must exist for each kind of statement in the 
language. In the following subsections, we present an axiom for assignment 

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   144

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
3.5  Describing the Meanings of Programs: Dynamic Semantics 

  145

statements and inference rules for statement sequences, selection statements, 
and logical pretest loop statements. Note that we assume that neither arithme-
tic nor  Boolean expressions have side effects.

3.5.3.3  Assignment Statements

The  precondition  and  postcondition  of  an  assignment  statement  together 
define its meaning. To define the meaning of an assignment statement there 
must be a way to compute its precondition from its postcondition.

Let x = E be a general assignment statement and Q be its postcondition. 

Then, its weakest precondition, P, is defined by the axiom

P  =  QxSE

which means that P is computed as Q with all instances of x replaced by E. For 
example, if we have the assignment statement and postcondition

a = b / 2 - 1 {a < 10}

the weakest precondition is computed by substituting b / 2 - 1 for a in the 
postcondition {a < 10}, as follows:

b / 2 - 1 < 10
b < 22

Thus, the weakest precondition for the given assignment statement and post-
condition is {b < 22}. Remember that the assignment axiom is guaranteed to 
be correct only in the absence of side effects. An assignment statement has a 
side effect if it changes some variable other than its target.

The usual notation for specifying the axiomatic semantics of a given state-

ment form is

{ P } S { Q }

where P is the precondition, Q is the postcondition, and S is the statement 
form. In the case of the assignment statement, the notation is

{QxSE} x = E{Q}

As another example of computing a precondition for an assignment state-

ment, consider the following:

x = 2 * y - 3 {x > 25}

The precondition is computed as follows:

2 * y - 3 > 25
y > 14

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   145

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
146 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

So {y  >  14} is the weakest precondition for this assignment statement and 
postcondition.

Note that the appearance of the left side of the assignment statement in its 
right side does not affect the process of computing the weakest precondition. 
For example, for

x = x + y - 3 {x > 10}

the weakest precondition is

x + y - 3 > 10
y > 13 - x

Recall that axiomatic semantics was developed to prove the correctness 
of programs. In light of that, it is natural at this point to wonder how the 
axiom for assignment statements can be used to prove anything. Here is how: 
A given assignment statement with both a precondition and a postcondition 
can be considered a logical statement, or theorem. If the assignment axiom, 
when applied to the postcondition and the assignment statement, produces the 
given precondition, the theorem is proved. For example, consider the following 
logical statement:

{x > 3} x = x - 3 {x > 0}

Using the assignment axiom on the statement and its postcondition produces  
{x  >  3}, which is the given precondition. Therefore, we have proven the 
example logical statement.

Next, consider the following logical statement:

{x > 5} x = x - 3 {x > 0}

In this case, the given precondition, {x > 5}, is not the same as the assertion 
produced by the axiom. However, it is obvious that {x > 5} implies {x > 3}. 
To use this in a proof, an inference rule named the rule of consequence is 
needed. The form of the rule of consequence is

{P}  S  {Q}, P′ = 7   P, Q = 7   Q′
{P′} S {Q′}

The => symbol means “implies,” and S can be any program statement. The rule 
can be stated as follows: If the logical statement {P} S {Q} is true, the assertion 
P′ implies the assertion P, and the assertion Q implies the assertion Q′, then it 
can be inferred that {P′} S {Q′}. In other words, the rule of consequence says 
that a postcondition can always be weakened and a precondition can always be 
strengthened. This is quite useful in program proofs. For example, it allows the 
completion of the proof of the last logical statement example above. If we let P 
be {x > 3}, Q and Q′ be {x > 0}, and P′ be {x > 5}, we have

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   146

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
3.5  Describing the Meanings of Programs: Dynamic Semantics 

  147

{x  7  3}x = x - 3{x 7  0},(x 7  5) = 7 {x 7  3},(x 7  0) = 7 (x 7  0)
{x 7  5}x = x - 3{x 7  0}

The first term of the antecedent ({x > 3} x = x - 3 {x > 0}) was proven 
with the assignment axiom. The second and third terms are obvious. There-
fore, by the rule of consequence, the consequent is true.

3.5.3.4  Sequences

The weakest precondition for a sequence of statements cannot be described by 
an axiom, because the precondition depends on the particular kinds of state-
ments in the sequence. In this case, the precondition can only be described with 
an inference rule. Let S1 and S2 be adjacent program statements. If S1 and S2 
have the following pre- and postconditions

{P1}  S1 {P2}
{P2}  S2  {P3}

the inference rule for such a two-statement sequence is

{P1}  S1 {P2}, {P2}  S2 {P3}
{P1}  S1, S2  {P3}

So, for our example, {P1}  S1; S2  {P3} describes the axiomatic semantics of 
the sequence S1; S2. The inference rule states that to get the sequence pre-
condition, the precondition of the second statement is computed. This new 
assertion is then used as the postcondition of the first statement, which can 
then be used to compute the precondition of the first statement, which is 
also the precondition of the whole sequence. If S1 and S2 are the assignment 
statements

x1 = E1

and

x2 = E2

then we have

{P3x2 S E2} x2 = E2 {P3}
{(P3x2 S E2)x1 S E1} x1 = E1 {P3x2 S E2}

Therefore, the weakest precondition for the sequence x1 = E1; x2 = E2 with 
postcondition P3 is {(P3x2 S E2)x1 S E1}.

For example, consider the following sequence and postcondition:

y = 3 * x + 1;
x = y + 3;
{x < 10}

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   147

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
148 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

The precondition for the second assignment statement is

y < 7

which is used as the postcondition for the first statement. The precondition for 
the first assignment statement can now be computed:

3 * x + 1 < 7
x < 2

So,  {x  <  2} is the precondition of both the first statement and the two- 
statement sequence.

3.5.3.5  Selection

We next consider the inference rule for selection statements, the general form 
of which is

if B then S1 else S2

We consider only selections that include else clauses. The inference rule is

{B and P} S1 {Q}, {(not B) and P} S2 {Q}
{P} if B then S1 else S2 {Q}

This rule specifies that selection statements must be proven both when the 
Boolean control expression is true and when it is false. The first logical state-
ment above the line represents the then clause; the second represents the else 
clause. According to the inference rule, we need a precondition P that can be 
used in the precondition of both the then and else clauses.

Consider the following example of the computation of the precondition 

using the selection inference rule. The example selection statement is

if x > 0 then 
  y = y - 1
else
  y = y + 1

Suppose the postcondition, Q, for this selection statement is {y > 0}. We 

can use the axiom for assignment on the then clause

y = y - 1 {y > 0}

This produces {y - 1 > 0} or {y > 1}. It can be used as the P part of the pre-
condition for the then clause. Now we apply the same axiom to the else clause

y = y + 1 {y > 0}

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   148

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
3.5  Describing the Meanings of Programs: Dynamic Semantics 

  149

which produces the precondition {y + 1 > 0} or {y > -1}. Because {y > 1} => 
{y > -1}, the rule of consequence allows us to use {y > 1} for the precondition 
of the whole selection statement.

3.5.3.6  Logical Pretest Loops

Another essential construct of imperative programming languages is the logical 
pretest, or while loop. Computing the weakest precondition for a while loop 
is inherently more difficult than for a sequence, because the number of itera-
tions cannot always be predetermined. In a case where the number of iterations 
is known, the loop can be unrolled and treated as a sequence.

The problem of computing the weakest precondition for loops is similar to 
the problem of proving a theorem about all positive integers. In the latter case, 
induction is normally used, and the same inductive method can be used for some 
loops. The principal step in induction is finding an inductive hypothesis. The 
corresponding step in the axiomatic semantics of a while loop is finding an asser-
tion called a loop invariant, which is crucial to finding the weakest precondition.
The inference rule for computing the precondition for a while loop is as 

follows:

{I and B} S {I}
{I} while B do S end {I and (not B)}

In this rule, I is the loop invariant. This seems simple, but it is not. The com-
plexity lies in finding an appropriate loop invariant.

The axiomatic description of a while loop is written as

{P} while B do S end {Q}

The loop invariant must satisfy a number of requirements to be useful. First, 
the weakest precondition for the while loop must guarantee the truth of the 
loop invariant. In turn, the loop invariant must guarantee the truth of the post-
condition upon loop termination. These constraints move us from the inference 
rule to the axiomatic description. During execution of the loop, the truth of 
the loop invariant must be unaffected by the evaluation of the loop-controlling 
Boolean expression and the loop body statements. Hence, the name invariant.
Another complicating factor for while loops is the question of loop termi-
nation. A loop that does not terminate cannot be correct, and in fact computes 
nothing. If Q is the postcondition that holds immediately after loop exit, then 
a precondition P for the loop is one that guarantees Q at loop exit and also 
guarantees that the loop terminates.

The complete axiomatic description of a while construct requires all of 

the following to be true, in which I is the loop invariant:

P => I
{I and B} S { I }
(I and (not B)) => Q
the loop terminates

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   149

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
150 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

If a loop computes a sequence of numeric values, it may be possible to find 
a loop invariant using an approach that is used for determining the inductive 
hypothesis when mathematical induction is used to prove a statement about a 
mathematical sequence. The relationship between the number of iterations and 
the precondition for the loop body is computed for a few cases, with the hope 
that a pattern emerges that will apply to the general case. It is helpful to treat 
the process of producing a weakest precondition as a function, wp. In general

wp(statement, postcondition) = precondition

A wp function is often called a predicate transformer, because it takes a pred-
icate, or assertion, as a parameter and returns another predicate.

To find I, the loop postcondition Q is used to compute preconditions for 
several different numbers of iterations of the loop body, starting with none. If 
the loop body contains a single assignment statement, the axiom for assignment 
statements can be used to compute these cases. Consider the example loop:

while y <> x do y = y + 1 end {y = x}

Remember that the equal sign is being used for two different purposes here. 
In assertions, it means mathematical equality; outside assertions, it means the 
assignment operator.

For zero iterations, the weakest precondition is, obviously,

{y = x}

For one iteration, it is

wp(y = y + 1, {y = x}) = {y + 1 = x}, or {y = x - 1}

For two iterations, it is

wp(y = y + 1, {y = x - 1})={y + 1 = x - 1}, or {y = x - 2}

For three iterations, it is

wp(y = y + 1, {y = x - 2})={y + 1 = x - 2}, or {y = x – 3}

It is now obvious that {y < x} will suffice for cases of one or more iterations. 
Combining this with {y  =  x} for the zero iterations case, we get {y  <=  x}, 
which can be used for the loop invariant. A precondition for the while state-
ment can be determined from the loop invariant. In fact, I can be used as the 
precondition, P.

We must ensure that our choice satisfies the four criteria for I for our 
example loop. First, because P = I, P => I. The second requirement is that the 
following must be true:

{ I and B } S { I }

In our example, we have

{y <= x and y <> x} y = y + 1 {y <= x}

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   150

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
3.5  Describing the Meanings of Programs: Dynamic Semantics 

  151

Applying the assignment axiom to

y = y + 1 {y <= x}

we get {y  +  1  <=  x}, which is equivalent to {y  <  x}, which is implied by  
{y <= x and y <> x}. So, the earlier statement is proven.

Next, we must have

{I and (not B)} => Q

In our example, we have

{(y <= x) and not (y <> x)} => {y = x}
{(y <= x) and (y = x)} => {y = x}
{y = x} => {y = x}

So, this is obviously true. Next, loop termination must be considered. In this 
example, the question is whether the loop

{y <= x} while y <> x do y = y + 1 end {y = x}

terminates. Recalling that x and y are assumed to be integer variables, it is easy 
to see that this loop does terminate. The precondition guarantees that y initially 
is not larger than x. The loop body increments y with each iteration, until y is 
equal to x. No matter how much smaller y is than x initially, it will eventually 
become equal to x. So the loop will terminate. Because our choice of I satisfies 
all four criteria, it is a satisfactory loop invariant and loop precondition.

The previous process used to compute the invariant for a loop does not 
always produce an assertion that is the weakest precondition (although it does 
in the example).

As another example of finding a loop invariant using the approach used in 

mathematical induction, consider the following loop statement:

while  s > 1  do  s = s / 2  end  {s = 1}

As before, we use the assignment axiom to try to find a loop invariant and a pre-
condition for the loop. For zero iterations, the weakest precondition is {s = 1}.
For one iteration, it is

wp(s = s / 2, {s = 1}) = {s / 2 = 1}, or {s = 2}

For two iterations, it is

wp(s = s / 2, {s = 2}) = {s / 2 = 2}, or {s = 4}

For three iterations, it is

wp(s = s / 2, {s = 4}) = {s / 2 = 4}, or {s = 8}

From these cases, we can see clearly that the invariant is

{s is a nonnegative power of 2}

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   151

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
152 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

Once  again,  the  computed  I  can  serve  as  P,  and  I  passes  the  four  require-
ments. Unlike our earlier example of finding a loop precondition, this one 
clearly  is  not  a  weakest  precondition.  Consider  using  the  precondition  
{s > 1}. The logical statement

{s > 1} while  s > 1 do  s = s / 2 end {s = 1}

can easily be proven, and this precondition is significantly broader than the one 
computed earlier. The loop and precondition are satisfied for any positive value 
for s, not just powers of 2, as the process indicates. Because of the rule of con-
sequence, using a precondition that is stronger than the weakest precondition 
does not invalidate a proof.

Finding loop invariants is not always easy. It is helpful to understand the 
nature of these invariants. First, a loop invariant is a weakened version of the 
loop postcondition and also a precondition for the loop. So, I must be weak 
enough to be satisfied prior to the beginning of loop execution, but when 
combined with the loop exit condition, it must be strong enough to force the 
truth of the postcondition.

Because of the difficulty of proving loop termination, that requirement 
is often ignored. If loop termination can be shown, the axiomatic description 
of the loop is called total correctness. If the other conditions can be met but 
termination is not guaranteed, it is called partial correctness.

In more complex loops, finding a suitable loop invariant, even for partial 
correctness, requires a good deal of ingenuity. Because computing the precondi-
tion for a while loop depends on finding a loop invariant, proving the correct-
ness of programs with while loops using axiomatic semantics can be difficult.

3.5.3.7  Program Proofs

This section provides validations for two simple programs. The first example 
of a correctness proof is for a very short program, consisting of a sequence of 
three assignment statements that interchange the values of two variables.

{x = A AND y = B}
t = x;
x = y;
y = t;
{x = B AND y = A}

Because  the  program  consists  entirely  of  assignment  statements  in  a 
sequence, the assignment axiom and the inference rule for sequences can be 
used to prove its correctness. The first step is to use the assignment axiom on 
the last statement and the postcondition for the whole program. This yields 
the precondition

{x = B AND t = A}

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   152

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
3.5  Describing the Meanings of Programs: Dynamic Semantics 

  153

Next, we use this new precondition as a postcondition on the middle state-

ment and compute its precondition, which is

{y = B AND t = A}

Next, we use this new assertion as the postcondition on the first statement 

and apply the assignment axiom, which yields

{y = B AND x = A}

which is the same as the precondition on the program, except for the order of 
operands on the AND operator. Because AND is a symmetric operator, our proof 
is complete.

The following example is a proof of correctness of a pseudocode program 

that computes the factorial function.

{n >= 0}
count = n;
fact = 1;
while count <> 0 do 
    fact = fact * count;
    count = count - 1;
end
{fact = n!}

The method described earlier for finding the loop invariant does not work for 
the loop in this example. Some ingenuity is required here, which can be aided 
by a brief study of the code. The loop computes the factorial function in order 
of the last multiplication first; that is, (n - 1) * n is done first, assuming n is 
greater than 1. So, part of the invariant can be the following:

fact = (count + 1) * (count + 2) * . . . * (n - 1) * n

But we also must ensure that count is always nonnegative, which we can do by 
adding that to the assertion above, to get the following:

I = (fact = (count + 1) * . . . * n) AND (count >= 0)

Next, we must confirm that this I meets the requirements for invariants. 
Once again we let I also be used for P, so P clearly implies I. The next ques-
tion is

{ I and B } S { I }

I and B is the following:

((fact = (count + 1) * . . . * n) AND (count >= 0)) AND
    (count <> 0)

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   153

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
154 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

This reduces to

(fact = (count + 1) * . . . * n) AND (count > 0)

In our case, we must compute the precondition of the body of the loop, using 
the invariant for the postcondition. For

{P} count = count - 1 {I}

we compute P to be

{(fact = count * (count + 1) * . . . * n) AND
    (count >= 1)}

Using this as the postcondition for the first assignment in the loop body,

{P} fact = fact * count {(fact = count * (count + 1)

                                     * . . . * n) AND (count >= 1)}

In this case, P is

{(fact = (count + 1) * . . . * n) AND (count >= 1)}

It is clear that I and B implies this P, so by the rule of consequence,

{I AND B} S {I}

is true. Finally, the last test of I is

I AND (NOT B) => Q

For our example, this is

((fact = (count + 1) * . . . * n) AND (count >= 0)) AND
(count = 0)) => fact = n!

This is clearly true, for when count = 0, the first part is precisely the defi-
nition  of  factorial.  So,  our  choice  of  I  meets  the  requirements  for  a  loop 
invariant. Now we can use our P (which is the same as I) from the while as 
the postcondition on the second assignment of the program

{P} fact = 1 {(fact = (count + 1) * . . . * n) AND
    (count >= 0)}

which yields for P

(1 = (count + 1) * . . . * n) AND (count >= 0))

Using this as the postcondition for the first assignment in the code

{P} count = n {(1 = (count + 1) * . . . * n) AND
    (count >= 0))}

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   154

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 

  155

produces for P

{(n + 1) * . . . * n = 1) AND (n >= 0)}

The left operand of the AND operator is true (because 1  =  1) and the right 
operand is exactly the precondition of the whole code segment, {n  >=  0}. 
Therefore, the program has been proven to be correct.

3.5.3.8  Evaluation

As stated previously, to define the semantics of a complete programming lan-
guage using the axiomatic method, there must be an axiom or an inference 
rule for each statement type in the language. Defining axioms or inference 
rules for some of the statements of programming languages has proven to be 
a difficult task. An obvious solution to this problem is to design the language 
with the axiomatic method in mind, so that only statements for which axioms 
or inference rules can be written are included. Unfortunately, such a language 
would necessarily leave out some useful and powerful statements.

Axiomatic semantics is a powerful tool for research into program correct-
ness proofs, and it provides an excellent framework in which to reason about 
programs, both during their construction and later. Its usefulness in describing 
the meaning of programming languages to language users and compiler writers 
is, however, highly limited.

S U M M A R Y

Backus-Naur Form and context-free grammars are equivalent metalanguages 
that are well suited for the task of describing the syntax of programming lan-
guages. Not only are they concise descriptive tools, but also the parse trees 
that can be associated with their generative actions give graphical evidence of 
the underlying syntactic structures. Furthermore, they are naturally related to 
recognition devices for the languages they generate, which leads to the rela-
tively easy construction of syntax analyzers for compilers for these languages.
An attribute grammar is a descriptive formalism that can describe both the 
syntax and static semantics of a language. Attribute grammars are extensions to 
context-free grammars. An attribute grammar consists of a grammar, a set of 
attributes, a set of attribute computation functions, and a set of predicates that 
describe static semantics rules.

This  chapter  provides  brief  introductions  to  three  methods  of  semantic 
description: operational, denotational, and axiomatic. Operational semantics is a 
method of describing the meaning of language constructs in terms of their effects 
on an ideal machine. In denotational semantics, mathematical objects are used to 
represent the meanings of language constructs. Language entities are converted to 
these mathematical objects with recursive functions. Axiomatic semantics, which is 
based on formal logic, was devised as a tool for proving the correctness of programs.

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   155

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
156 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

B I B L I O G R A P H I C   N O T E S

Syntax  description  using  context-free  grammars  and  BNF  are  thoroughly 
 discussed in Cleaveland and Uzgalis (1976).

Research  in  axiomatic  semantics  was  begun  by  Floyd  (1967)  and  fur-
ther developed by Hoare (1969). The semantics of a large part of Pascal was 
described by Hoare and Wirth (1973) using this method. The parts they did 
not complete involved functional side effects and goto statements. These were 
found to be the most difficult to describe.

The technique of using preconditions and postconditions during the devel-
opment of programs is described (and advocated) by Dijkstra (1976) and also 
discussed in detail in Gries (1981).

Good  introductions  to  denotational  semantics  can  be  found  in  Gordon 
(1979) and Stoy (1977). Introductions to all of the semantics description methods 
discussed in this chapter can be found in Marcotty et al. (1976). Another good 
reference for much of the chapter material is Pagan (1981). The form of the deno-
tational semantic functions in this chapter is similar to that found in Meyer (1990).

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  Define syntax and semantics.
2.  Who are language descriptions for?
3.  Describe the operation of a general language generator.
4.  Describe the operation of a general language recognizer.
5.  What is the difference between a sentence and a sentential form?
6.  Define a left-recursive grammar rule.
7.  What three extensions are common to most EBNFs?
8.  Distinguish between static and dynamic semantics.
9.  What purpose do predicates serve in an attribute grammar?

10.  What is the difference between a synthesized and an inherited attribute?
11.  How is the order of evaluation of attributes determined for the trees of a 

given attribute grammar?

12.  What is the primary use of attribute grammars?
13.  Explain the primary uses of a methodology and notation for describing 

the semantics of programming languages.

14.  Why can machine languages not be used to define statements in 

operational semantics?

15.  Describe the two levels of uses of operational semantics.
16.  In denotational semantics, what are the syntactic and semantic domains?
17.  What is stored in the state of a program for denotational semantics?
18.  Which semantics approach is most widely known?

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   156

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
Problem Set 

  157

19.  What two things must be defined for each language entity in order to 

construct a denotational description of the language?

20.  Which part of an inference rule is the antecedent?

21.  What is a predicate transformer function?

22.  What does partial correctness mean for a loop construct?

23.  On what branch of mathematics is axiomatic semantics based?

24.  On what branch of mathematics is denotational semantics based?

25.  What is the problem with using a software pure interpreter for 

operational semantics?

26.  Explain what the preconditions and postconditions of a given statement 

mean in axiomatic semantics.

27.  Describe the approach of using axiomatic semantics to prove the 

correctness of a given program.

28.  Describe the basic concept of denotational semantics.

29.  In what fundamental way do operational semantics and denotational 

semantics differ?

P R O B L E M   S E T

1.  The two mathematical models of language description are generation 

and recognition. Describe how each can define the syntax of a 
programming language.

2.  Write EBNF descriptions for the following:

a.  A Java class definition header statement

b.  A Java method call statement

c.  A C switch statement

d.  A C union definition

e.  C float literals

3.  Rewrite the BNF of Example 3.4 to give + precedence over * and force + 

to be right associative.

4.  Rewrite the BNF of Example 3.4 to add the ++ and -- unary operators 

of Java.

5.  Write a BNF description of the Boolean expressions of Java, including 

the three operators &&, ||, and ! and the relational expressions.

6.  Using the grammar in Example 3.2, show a parse tree and a leftmost 

derivation for each of the following statements:

a.  A = A * (B + (C * A))

b.  B = C * (A * C + B)

c.  A = A * (B + (C))

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   157

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
158 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

7.  Using the grammar in Example 3.4, show a parse tree and a leftmost 

derivation for each of the following statements:

a.  A = (A + B) * C

b.  A = B + C + A

c.  A = A * (B + C)

d.  A = B * (C * (A + B))

8.  Prove that the following grammar is ambiguous:

<S> S <A>
<A> S <A> + <A> | <id>
<id> S a | b | c

9.  Modify the grammar of Example 3.4 to add a unary minus operator that 

has higher precedence than either + or *.

10.  Describe, in English, the language defined by the following grammar:

<S> S <A> <B> <C>
<A> S a <A> | a
<B> S b <B> | b
<C> S c <C> | c

11.  Consider the following grammar:

<S> S <A> a <B> b
<A> S <A> b | b
<B> S a <B> | a

Which of the following sentences are in the language generated by this 
grammar?
a.  baab

b.  bbbab

c.  bbaaaaaS

d.  bbaab

12.  Consider the following grammar:

<S> S a <S> c <B> | <A> | b
<A> S c <A> | c
<B> S d | <A>

Which of the following sentences are in the language generated by this 
grammar?
a.  abcd

b.  acccbd

c.  acccbcc

d.  acd

e.  accc

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   158

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
 
Problem Set 

  159

13.  Write a grammar for the language consisting of strings that have n 
copies of the letter a followed by the same number of copies of the 
letter b, where n > 0. For example, the strings ab, aaaabbbb, and 
aaaaaaaabbbbbbbb are in the language but a, abb, ba, and aaabb are not.

14.  Draw parse trees for the sentences aabb and aaaabbbb, as derived from 

the grammar of Problem 13.

15.  Convert the BNF of Example 3.1 to EBNF.

16.  Convert the BNF of Example 3.3 to EBNF.

17.  Convert the following EBNF to BNF:

S S A{bA}
A S a[b]A

18.  What is the difference between an intrinsic attribute and a nonintrinsic 

synthesized attribute?

19.  Write an attribute grammar whose BNF basis is that of Example 3.6 in 

Section 3.4.5 but whose language rules are as follows: Data types cannot 
be mixed in expressions, but assignment statements need not have the 
same types on both sides of the assignment operator.

20.  Write an attribute grammar whose base BNF is that of Example 3.2 and 

whose type rules are the same as for the assignment statement example 
of Section 3.4.5.

21.  Using the virtual machine instructions given in Section 3.5.1.1, give an 

operational semantic definition of the following:

a.  Java do-while

b.  Ada for

c.  C++ if-then-else

d.  C for

e.  C switch

22.  Write a denotational semantics mapping function for the following 

statements:

a.  Ada for

b.  Java do-while

c.  Java Boolean expressions

d.  Java for

e.  C switch

23.  Compute the weakest precondition for each of the following assignment 

statements and postconditions:

a.  a = 2 * (b - 1) - 1 {a > 0}

b.  b = (c + 10) / 3 {b > 6}

c.  a = a + 2 * b - 1 {a > 1}

d.  x = 2 * y + x - 1 {x > 11}

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   159

1/5/18   11:12 PM

 
 
 
160 

  Chapter 3  

 Describing Syntax and Semantics

24.  Compute the weakest precondition for each of the following sequences 

of assignment statements and their postconditions:

a.  a = 2 * b + 1;

b = a - 3
{b < 0}

b.  a = 3 * (2 * b + a);

b = 2 * a - 1
{b > 5}

25.  Compute the weakest precondition for each of the following selection 

constructs and their postconditions:

a.  if (a == b)

  b = 2 * a + 1
else
  b = 2 * a;
{b > 1}

b.  if (x < y)

  x = x + 1
else
  x = 3 * x
{x < 0}

c.  if (x > y)

 y = 2 * x + 1

else 

  y = 3 * x - 1;

{y > 3}

26.  Explain the four criteria for proving the correctness of a logical pretest 

loop construct of the form while B do S end.

27.  Prove that (n + 1) * c* n = 1.
28.  Prove the following program is correct:

{n > 0}
count = n;
sum = 0;
while  count <> 0  do 
  sum = sum + count;
  count = count - 1;
end
{sum = 1 + 2 + . . . + n}

M03_SEBE8029_12_SE_C03.indd   160

1/5/18   11:12 PM
