# Fuente
- archivo: 221-258.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/Robert W. Sebesta - Concepts of Programming Languages-Pearson (2019)/221-258.pdf
- extraido: 2026-04-27T21:02:09

# Contenido

5 

Names, Bindings,  
and Scopes

5.1  Introduction

5.2  Names

5.3  Variables

5.4  The Concept of Binding

5.5  Scope

5.6  Scope and Lifetime

5.7  Referencing Environments

5.8  Named Constants

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   197

1/5/18   10:39 PM

197

198 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

T his chapter introduces the fundamental semantic issues of variables. It begins 

by describing the nature of names and special words in programming  languages. 
The attributes of variables, including type, address, and value, are then 

 discussed, including the issue of aliases. The important concepts of binding and 
 binding times are introduced next, including the different possible binding times for 
variable attributes and how they define four different categories of variables. Follow-
ing that, two very different scoping rules for names, static and dynamic, are described, 
along with the concept of a referencing environment of a statement. Finally, named 
constants and variable initialization are discussed.

5.1  Introduction

Imperative programming languages are, to varying degrees, abstractions of 
the underlying von Neumann computer architecture. The architecture’s two 
primary components are its memory, which stores both instructions and data, 
and its processor, which provides operations for modifying the contents of the 
memory. The abstractions in a language for the memory cells of the machine 
are variables. In some cases, the characteristics of the abstractions are very 
close to the characteristics of the cells; an example of this is an integer variable, 
which is usually represented directly in one or more bytes of memory. In other 
cases, the abstractions are far removed from the organization of the hardware 
memory, as with a three-dimensional array, which requires a software mapping 
function to support the abstraction.

A variable can be characterized by a collection of properties, or attributes, 
the most important of which is type, a fundamental concept in programming 
languages. Designing the data types of a language requires that a variety of 
issues be considered. (Data types are discussed in Chapter 6.) Among the most 
important of these issues are the scope and lifetime of variables.

Functional programming languages allow expressions to be named. These 
named expressions appear like assignments to variable names in imperative 
languages, but are fundamentally different in that they cannot be changed. So, 
they are like the named constants of the imperative languages. Pure functional 
languages do not have variables that are like those of the imperative languages. 
However, many functional languages do include such variables.

In the remainder of this book, families of languages will often be referred to 
as if they were single languages. For example, Fortran will mean all of the versions 
of Fortran. This is also the case for Ada. Likewise, a reference to C will mean the 
original version of C, as well as C89 and C99. When a specific version of a language 
is named, it is because it is different from the other family members within the topic 
being discussed. If we add a plus sign (+) to the name of a version of a language, 
we mean all versions of the language beginning with the one named. For example, 
Fortran 95+ means all versions of Fortran beginning with Fortran 95. The phrase 
C-based languages will be used to refer to C, Objective-C, C++, Java, and C#.1

1.  We were tempted to include the scripting languages JavaScript and PHP as C-based lan-

guages, but decided they were just a bit too different from their ancestors.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   198

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
 
5.2  Names

5.2  Names 

  199

Before beginning our discussion of variables, the design of one of the funda-
mental attributes of variables, names, must be covered. Names are also associ-
ated with subprograms, formal parameters, and other program constructs. The 
term identifier is often used interchangeably with name.

5.2.1  Design Issues

The following are the primary design issues for names:

•  Are names case sensitive?

•  Are the special words of the language reserved words or keywords?

These issues are discussed in the following two subsections, which also include 
examples of several design choices.

5.2.2  Name Forms

A name is a string of characters used to identify some entity in a program.

C99 has no length limitation on its internal names, but only the first 63 
are significant. External names in C99 (those defined outside functions, which 
must be handled by the linker) are restricted to 31 characters. Names in Java 
and C# have no length limit, and all characters in them are sig-
nificant. C++ does not specify a length limit on names, although 
implementors sometimes do.

histor y note

The earliest programming lan-
guages used single-character 
names. This notation was natu-
ral because early programming 
was primarily mathematical, 
and mathematicians have long 
used single-character names 
for unknowns in their formal 
notations.

Fortran I broke with the 
tradition of the single-character 
name, allowing up to six charac-
ters in its names.

Names in most programming languages have the same form: 
a  letter  followed  by  a  string  consisting  of  letters,  digits,  and 
underscore characters ( _ ). Although the use of underscore char-
acters to form names was widely used in the 1970s and 1980s, 
that practice is now far less popular. In the C-based languages, it 
has to a large extent been replaced by the so-called camel notation, 
in which all of the words of a multiple-word name except the first 
are capitalized, as in myStack.2 Note that the use of underscores 
and  mixed  case  in  names  is  a  programming  style  issue,  not  a 
language design issue.

All variable names in PHP must begin with a dollar sign. In 
Perl, the special character at the beginning of a variable’s name, 
$, @, or %, specifies its type (although in a different sense than 
in other languages). In Ruby, special characters at the beginning 
of a variable’s name, @ or @@, indicate that the variable is an instance or a class 
variable, respectively.

2.  It is called “camel” because words written in it often have embedded uppercase letters, which 

look like a camel’s humps.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   199

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
200 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

In many languages, notably the C-based languages, uppercase and lowercase 
letters in names are distinct; that is, names in these languages are case sensitive. 
For example, the following three names are distinct in C++: rose, ROSE, and 
Rose. To some people, this is a serious detriment to readability, because names 
that look very similar in fact denote different entities. In that sense, case sensitiv-
ity violates the design principle that language constructs that look similar should 
have similar meanings. But in languages whose variable names are case-sensitive, 
although Rose and rose look similar, there is no connection between them.

Obviously, not everyone agrees that case sensitivity is bad for names. In 
C, the problems of case sensitivity are avoided by the convention that variable 
names do not include uppercase letters. In Java and C#, however, the problem 
cannot be escaped because many of the predefined names include both upper-
case and lowercase letters. For example, the Java method for converting a string 
to an integer value is parseInt, and spellings such as ParseInt and parseint 
are not recognized. This is a problem of writability rather than readability, 
because the need to remember specific case usage makes it more difficult to 
write correct programs. It is a kind of intolerance on the part of the language 
designer, which is enforced by the compiler.

5.2.3  Special Words

Special words in programming languages are used to make programs more 
readable by naming actions to be performed. They also are used to separate the 
syntactic parts of statements and programs. In most languages, special words 
are classified as reserved words, which means they cannot be redefined by pro-
grammers. But in some, such as Fortran, they are only keywords, which means 
they can be redefined.

A reserved word is a special word of a programming language that can-
not be used as a name. There is one potential problem with reserved words: 
If the language includes a large number of reserved words, the user may have 
difficulty making up names that are not reserved. The best example of this 
is COBOL, which has 300 reserved words. Unfortunately, some of the most 
commonly chosen names by programmers are in the list of reserved words—for 
example, LENGTH, BOTTOM, DESTINATION, and COUNT.

In program code examples in this book, reserved words are presented in 

boldface.

In most languages, names that are defined in other program units, such as 
Java packages and C and C++ libraries, can be made visible to a program. These 
names are predefined, but visible only if explicitly imported. Once imported, 
they cannot be redefined.

5.3  Variables

A program variable is an abstraction of a computer memory cell or collection 
of cells. Programmers often think of variables as names for memory locations, 
but there is much more to a variable than just a name.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   200

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
5.3  Variables 

  201

The move from machine languages to assembly languages was largely one 
of replacing absolute numeric memory addresses for data with names, making 
programs far more readable and therefore easier to write and maintain. Assem-
bly languages also provided an escape from the problem of manual absolute 
addressing, because the translator that converted the names to actual addresses 
also chose those addresses.

A variable can be characterized as a sextuple of attributes: (name, address, 
value, type, lifetime, and scope). Although this may seem too complicated for 
such an apparently simple concept, it provides the clearest way to explain the 
various aspects of variables.

Our  discussion  of  variable  attributes  will  lead  to  examinations  of  the 
important related concepts of aliases, binding, binding times, declarations, 
scoping rules, and referencing environments.

The name, address, type, and value attributes of variables are discussed in 
the following subsections. The lifetime and scope attributes are discussed in 
Sections 5.4.3 and 5.5, respectively.

5.3.1  Name

Variable names are the most common names in programs. They were dis-
cussed at length in Section 5.2 in the general context of entity names in pro-
grams.  Most  variables  have  names.  The  ones  that  do  not  are  discussed  in 
Section 5.4.3.3.

5.3.2  Address

The address of a variable is the machine memory address with which it is asso-
ciated. This association is not as simple as it may appear. In many languages, 
it is possible for the same variable to be associated with different addresses at 
different times during the execution of the program. For example, if a sub-
program has a local variable that is allocated from the run-time stack when 
the subprogram is called, different calls may result in that variable having 
different addresses. These are in a sense different instantiations of the same  
variable.

The process of associating variables with addresses is further discussed in 
Section 5.4.3. An implementation model for subprograms and their activations 
is discussed in Chapter 10.

The  address  of  a  variable  is  sometimes  called  its  l-value,  because  the 
address is what is required when the name of a variable appears in the left side 
of an assignment.

It is possible to have multiple variables that have the same address. When 
more than one variable name can be used to access the same memory location, 
the variables are called aliases. Aliasing is a hindrance to readability because 
it allows a variable to have its value changed by an assignment to a different 
variable. For example, if variables named total and sum are aliases, any change 
to the value of total also changes the value of sum and vice versa. A reader of 
the program must always remember that total and sum are different names 

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   201

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
202 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

for the same memory cell. Because there can be any number of aliases in a 
program, this can be very difficult in practice. Aliasing also makes program 
verification more difficult.

Aliases can be created in programs in several different ways. One common 
way in C and C++ is with their union types. Unions are discussed at length in 
Chapter 6.

Two pointer variables are aliases when they point to the same memory 
location. The same is true for reference variables. This kind of aliasing is simply 
a side effect of the nature of pointers and references. When a C++ pointer is set 
to point at a named variable, the pointer, when dereferenced, and the variable’s 
name are aliases.

Aliasing can be created in many languages through subprogram parame-

ters. These kinds of aliases are discussed in Chapter 9.

The  time  when  a  variable  becomes  associated  with  an  address  is  very 
important to an understanding of programming languages. This subject is dis-
cussed in Section 5.4.3.

5.3.3  Type

The type of a variable determines the range of values the variable can store 
and the set of operations that are defined for values of the type. For example, 
the int type in Java specifies a value range of  -2147483648 to 2147483647 
and arithmetic operations for addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, 
and modulus.

5.3.4  Value

The value of a variable is the contents of the memory cell or cells associated 
with the variable. It is convenient to think of computer memory in terms of 
abstract cells, rather than physical cells. The physical cells, or individually 
addressable units, of most contemporary computer memories are eight-bit 
units called bytes. A byte size is too small for most program variables. An 
abstract memory cell has the size required by the variable with which it is 
associated. For example, although f loating-point values may occupy four 
physical  bytes  in  a  particular  implementation  of  a  particular  language,  a 
f loating-point value is thought of as occupying a single abstract memory 
cell. The value of each simple nonstructured type is considered to occupy 
a single abstract cell. Henceforth, the term memory cell will mean abstract 
memory cell.

A  variable’s  value  is  sometimes  called  its  r-value  because  it  is  what  is 
required when the name of the variable appears in the right side of an assign-
ment statement. To access the r-value, the l-value must be determined first. 
Such determinations are not always simple. For example, scoping rules can 
greatly complicate matters, as is discussed in Section 5.5.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   202

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
5.4  The Concept of Binding

5.4  The Concept of Binding 

  203

A binding is an association between an attribute and an entity, such as between 
a variable and its type or value, or between an operation and a symbol. The 
time at which a binding takes place is called binding time. Binding and bind-
ing times are prominent concepts in the semantics of programming languages. 
Bindings can take place at language design time, language implementation 
time, compile time, load time, link time, or run time. For example, the asterisk 
symbol (*) is usually bound to the multiplication operation at language design 
time. A data type, such as int in C, is bound to a range of possible values at 
language implementation time. At compile time, a variable in a Java program is 
bound to a particular data type. A variable may be bound to a storage cell when 
the program is loaded into memory. That same binding does not happen until 
run time in some cases, as with variables declared in Java methods. A call to a 
library subprogram is bound to the subprogram code at link time.

Consider the following C++ assignment statement:

count = count + 5;

Some of the bindings and their binding times for the parts of this assignment 
statement are as follows:

•  The type of count is bound at compile time.

•  The set of possible values of count is bound at compiler design time.
•  The meaning of the operator symbol + is bound at compile time, when the 

types of its operands have been determined.

•  The internal representation of the literal 5 is bound at compiler design time.

•  The value of count is bound at execution time with this statement.

A complete understanding of the binding times for the attributes of program enti-
ties is a prerequisite for understanding the semantics of a programming language. 
For example, to understand what a subprogram does, one must understand how 
the actual parameters in a call are bound to the formal parameters in its definition. 
To determine the current value of a variable, it may be necessary to know when 
the variable was bound to storage and with which statement or statements.

5.4.1  Binding of Attributes to Variables

A  binding  is  static  if  it  first  occurs  before  run  time  begins  and  remains 
unchanged throughout program execution. If the binding first occurs during 
run time or can change in the course of program execution, it is called dynamic. 
The physical binding of a variable to a storage cell in a virtual memory environ-
ment is complex, because the page or segment of the address space in which the 
cell resides may be moved in and out of memory many times during program 
execution. In a sense, such variables are bound and unbound repeatedly. These 

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   203

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
204 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

bindings, however, are maintained by computer hardware, and the changes are 
invisible to the program and the user. Because they are not important to the 
discussion, we are not concerned with these hardware bindings. The essential 
point is to distinguish between static and dynamic bindings.

5.4.2  Type Bindings

Before a variable can be referenced in a program, it must be bound to a data 
type. The two important aspects of this binding are how the type is specified 
and when the binding takes place. Types can be specified statically through 
some form of explicit or implicit declaration.

5.4.2.1  Static Type Binding

An explicit declaration is a statement in a program that lists variable names 
and specifies that they are a particular type. An implicit declaration is a means 
of associating variables with types through default conventions, rather than 
declaration statements. In this case, the first appearance of a variable name in 
a program constitutes its implicit declaration. Both explicit and implicit decla-
rations create static bindings to types.

Most widely used programming languages that use static type binding 
exclusively and were designed since the mid-1960s require explicit declarations 
of all variables (Visual Basic, ML, C#, and Swift are some exceptions).

Implicit variable type binding is done by the language processor, either a 
compiler or an interpreter. There are several different bases for implicit vari-
able type bindings. The simplest of these is naming conventions. In this case, 
the compiler or interpreter binds a variable to a type based on the syntactic 
form of the variable’s name.

Although they are a minor convenience to programmers, implicit decla-
rations can be detrimental to reliability because they prevent the compilation 
process from detecting some typographical and programmer errors.

Some of the problems with implicit declarations can be avoided by requir-
ing names for specific types to begin with particular special characters. For 
example, in Perl any name that begins with $ is a scalar, which can store either 
a string or a numeric value. If a name begins with @, it is an array; if it begins 
with a %, it is a hash structure.3 This creates different namespaces for different 
type variables. In this scenario, the names @apple and %apple are unrelated, 
because each is from a different namespace. Furthermore, a program reader 
always knows the type of a variable when reading its name.

Another kind of implicit type declarations uses context. This is sometimes 
called type inference. In the simpler case, the context is the type of the value 
assigned to the variable in a declaration statement. For example, in C# a var 
declaration of a variable must include an initial value, whose type is taken as 
the type of the variable. Consider the following declarations:

3.  Both arrays and hashes are considered types—both can store any scalar in their elements.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   204

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
 
5.4  The Concept of Binding 

  205

var sum = 0;
var total = 0.0;
var name = "Fred";

The types of sum, total, and name are int, float, and string, respectively. 
Keep in mind that these are statically typed variables—their types are fixed for 
the lifetime of the unit in which they are declared.

Visual Basic, Swift, and the functional languages ML, Haskell, OCaml, and 

F# also use type inferencing.

5.4.2.2  Dynamic Type Binding

With dynamic type binding, the type of a variable is not specified by a decla-
ration statement, nor can it be determined by the spelling of its name. Instead, 
the variable is bound to a type when it is assigned a value in an assignment state-
ment. When the assignment statement is executed, the variable being assigned 
is bound to the type of the value of the expression on the right side of the 
assignment. Such an assignment may also bind the variable to an address and 
a memory cell, because different type values may require different amounts of 
storage. Any variable can be assigned any type value. Furthermore, a variable’s 
type can change any number of times during program execution. It is important 
to realize that the type of a variable whose type is dynamically bound may be 
temporary.

When the type of a variable is statically bound, the name of the variable can 
be thought of being bound to a type, in the sense that the type and name of a 
variable are simultaneously bound. However, when a variable’s type is dynam-
ically bound, its name can be thought of as being only temporarily bound to a 
type. In reality, the names of variables are never bound to types. Names can be 
bound to variables and variables can be bound to types.

Languages in which types are dynamically bound are dramatically differ-
ent from those in which types are statically bound. The primary advantage of 
dynamic binding of variables to types is that it provides more programming 
f lexibility. For example, a program to process numeric data in a language that 
uses dynamic type binding can be written as a generic program, meaning that 
it is capable of dealing with data of any numeric type. Whatever type data is 
input will be acceptable, because the variables in which the data are to be stored 
can be bound to the correct type when the data is assigned to the variables 
after input. By contrast, because of static binding of types, one cannot write a 
C program to process data without knowing the type of that data.

Before the mid-1990s, the most commonly used programming languages 
used static type binding, the primary exceptions being some functional lan-
guages such as Lisp. However, since then there has been a significant shift to 
languages that use dynamic type binding. In Python, Ruby, JavaScript, and 
PHP, type binding is dynamic. For example, a JavaScript script may contain 
the following statement:

list = [10.2, 3.5];

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   205

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
206 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

Regardless of the previous type of the variable named list, this assignment 
causes it to become the name of a single-dimensioned array of length 2. If the 
statement

list = 47;

followed the previous example assignment, list would become the name of 
a scalar variable.

The option of dynamic type binding was included in C# 2010. A variable 
can be declared to use dynamic type binding by including the dynamic reserved 
word in its declaration, as in the following example:

dynamic  any;

This is similar, although also different from declaring any to have type object. 
It is similar in that any can be assigned a value of any type, just as if it were 
declared object. It is different in that it is not useful for several different situ-
ations of interoperation; for example, with dynamically typed languages such as 
IronPython and IronRuby (.NET versions of Python and Ruby, respectively). 
However, it is useful when data of unknown type come into a program from an 
external source. Class members, properties, method parameters, method return 
values, and local variables can all be declared dynamic.

In pure object-oriented languages—for example, Ruby—all variables are ref-
erences and do not have types; all data are objects and any variable can reference 
any object. Variables in such languages are, in a sense, all the same type—they 
are references. However, unlike the references in Java, which are restricted to 
referencing one specific type of value, variables in Ruby can reference any object.
There are two disadvantages to dynamic type binding. First, it causes pro-
grams to be less reliable, because the error-detection capability of the compiler 
is diminished relative to a compiler for a language with static type bindings. 
Dynamic type binding allows any variable to be assigned a value of any type. 
Incorrect types of right sides of assignments are not detected as errors; rather, 
the type of the left side is simply changed to the incorrect type. For example, 
suppose that in a particular JavaScript program, i and  x are currently the 
names of scalar numeric variables and y is currently the name of an array. 
Furthermore, suppose that the program needs the assignment statement

i = x;

but because of a keying error, it has the assignment statement

i = y;

In JavaScript (or any other language that uses dynamic type binding), no error 
is detected in this statement by the interpreter—the type of the variable named 
i is simply changed to an array. But later uses of i will expect it to be a scalar, 
and correct results will be impossible. In a language with static type binding, 

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   206

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
5.4  The Concept of Binding 

  207

such as Java, the compiler would detect the error in the assignment i = y, and 
the program would not get to execution.

Note that this disadvantage is also present to some extent in some languages 
that use static type binding, such as C and C++, which in many cases automat-
ically convert the type of the RHS of an assignment to the type of the LHS.

Perhaps the greatest disadvantage of dynamic type binding is cost. The 
cost of implementing dynamic attribute binding is considerable, particularly in 
execution time. Type checking must be done at run time. Furthermore, every 
variable must have a run-time descriptor associated with it to maintain the cur-
rent type. The storage used for the value of a variable must be of varying size, 
because different type values require different amounts of storage.

Finally, languages that have dynamic type binding for variables are usually 
implemented using pure interpreters rather than compilers. Computers do not 
have instructions whose operand types are not known at compile time. There-
fore, a compiler cannot build machine instructions for the expression a + b if 
the types of a and b are not known at compile time. Pure interpretation typically 
takes at least 10 times as long as it does to execute equivalent machine code. 
Of course, if a language is implemented with a pure interpreter, the time to do 
dynamic type binding is hidden by the overall time of interpretation, so it seems 
less costly in that environment. On the other hand, languages with static type 
bindings are seldom implemented by pure interpretation, because programs in 
these languages can be easily translated to very efficient machine code versions.

5.4.3  Storage Bindings and Lifetime

The fundamental character of an imperative programming language is in large 
part determined by the design of the storage bindings for its variables. It is 
therefore important to have a clear understanding of these bindings.

The memory cell to which a variable is bound somehow must be taken 
from a pool of available memory. This process is called allocation. Deallo-
cation is the process of placing a memory cell that has been unbound from a 
variable back into the pool of available memory.

The lifetime of a variable is the time during which the variable is bound 
to a specific memory location. So, the lifetime of a variable begins when it 
is  bound  to  a  specific  cell  and  ends  when  it  is  unbound  from  that  cell.  To 
investigate storage bindings of variables, it is convenient to separate scalar 
(unstructured) variables into four categories, according to their lifetimes. These 
categories are named static, stack-dynamic, explicit heap-dynamic, and implicit 
heap-dynamic. In the following sections, we discuss the definitions of these four 
categories, along with their purposes, advantages, and disadvantages.

5.4.3.1  Static Variables

A  static  variable  is  one  that  is  bound  to  a  memory  cell  before  program 
execution begins and remains bound to that same memory cell until pro-
gram execution terminates. Statically bound variables have several valuable 

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   207

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
208 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

applications in programming. Globally accessible variables are often used 
throughout the execution of a program, thus making it necessary to have them 
bound to the same storage during that execution. Sometimes it is  convenient 
to have subprograms that are history sensitive. Such a subprogram must have 
local static variables.

One advantage of static variables is efficiency. All addressing of static vari-
ables can be direct;4 other kinds of variables often require indirect addressing, 
which is slower. Also, no run-time overhead is incurred for allocation and deal-
location of static variables, although this time is often negligible.

One disadvantage of static binding to storage is reduced f lexibility; in 
particular, a language that has only static variables cannot support recursive 
subprograms. Another disadvantage is that storage cannot be shared among 
variables. For example, suppose a program has two subprograms, both of which 
require large arrays. Furthermore, suppose that the two subprograms are never 
active at the same time. If the arrays are static, they cannot share the same 
storage.

C and C++ allow programmers to include the static specifier on a variable 
definition in a function, making the variables it defines static. Note that when 
the static modifier appears in the declaration of a variable in a class definition 
in C++, Java, and C#, it also implies that the variable is a class variable, rather 
than an instance variable. Class variables are created statically some time before 
the class is first instantiated.

5.4.3.2  Stack-Dynamic Variables

Stack-dynamic variables are those whose storage bindings are created when 
their  declaration  statements  are  elaborated,  but  whose  types  are  statically 
bound. Elaboration of such a declaration refers to the storage allocation and 
binding process indicated by the declaration, which takes place when execution 
reaches the code to which the declaration is attached. Therefore, elaboration 
occurs during run time. For example, the variable declarations that appear at 
the beginning of a Java method are elaborated when the method is called and 
the variables defined by those declarations are deallocated when the method 
completes its execution.

As their name indicates, stack-dynamic variables are allocated from the 

run-time stack.

Some languages—for example, C++ and Java—allow variable declarations 
to occur anywhere a statement can appear. In some implementations of these 
languages, all of the stack-dynamic variables declared in a function or method 
(not including those declared in nested blocks) may be bound to storage at the 
beginning of execution of the function or method, even though the declarations 
of some of these variables do not appear at the beginning. In such cases, the 

4.  In some implementations, static variables are addressed through a base register, making 

accesses to them as costly as for stack-allocated variables.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   208

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
 
5.4  The Concept of Binding 

  209

variable becomes visible at the declaration, but the storage binding (and initial-
ization, if it is specified in the declaration) occurs when the function or method 
begins execution. The fact that storage binding of a variable takes place before 
it becomes visible does not affect the semantics of the language.

The advantages of stack-dynamic variables are as follows: To be useful, at 
least in most cases, recursive subprograms require some form of dynamic local 
storage so that each active copy of the recursive subprogram has its own ver-
sion of the local variables. These needs are conveniently met by stack-dynamic 
variables. Even in the absence of recursion, having stack-dynamic local storage 
for subprograms is not without merit, because all subprograms share the same 
memory space for their locals.

The disadvantages, relative to static variables, of stack-dynamic variables 
are  the  run-time  overhead  of  allocation  and  deallocation,  possibly  slower 
accesses  because  indirect  addressing  is  required,  and  the  fact  that  subpro-
grams cannot be history sensitive. The time required to allocate and deallo-
cate stack-dynamic variables is not significant, because all of the stack-dynamic 
variables that are declared at the beginning of a subprogram are allocated and 
deallocated together, rather than by separate operations.

In Java, C++, and C#, variables defined in methods are by default stack 

dynamic.

All attributes other than storage are statically bound to stack-dynamic 
scalar variables. That is not the case for some structured types, as is discussed 
in Chapter 6. Implementation of allocation/deallocation processes for stack- 
dynamic variables is discussed in Chapter 10.

5.4.3.3  Explicit Heap-Dynamic Variables

Explicit heap-dynamic variables are nameless (abstract) memory cells that 
are allocated and deallocated by explicit run-time instructions written by the 
programmer. These variables, which are allocated from and deallocated to the 
heap, can only be referenced through pointer or reference variables. The heap 
is a collection of storage cells whose organization is highly disorganized due 
to the unpredictability of its use. The pointer or reference variable that is used 
to access an explicit heap-dynamic variable is created as any other scalar vari-
able. An explicit heap-dynamic variable is created by either an operator (for 
example, in C++) or a call to a system subprogram provided for that purpose 
(for example, in C).

In C++, the allocation operator, named new, uses a type name as its oper-
and. When executed, an explicit heap-dynamic variable of the operand type 
is created and its address is returned. Because an explicit heap-dynamic vari-
able is bound to a type at compile time, that binding is static. However, such 
variables are bound to storage at the time they are created, which is during 
run time.

In addition to a subprogram or operator for creating explicit heap- dynamic 
variables,  some  languages  include  a  subprogram  or  operator  for  explicitly 
destroying them.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   209

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
210 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

As an example of explicit heap-dynamic variables, consider the following 

C++ code segment:

int  *intnode;      // Create a pointer
intnode =  new int; // Create the heap-dynamic variable
. . .
delete  intnode;   // Deallocate the heap-dynamic variable
                        // to which intnode points

In this example, an explicit heap-dynamic variable of int type is created by 
the new operator. This variable can then be referenced through the pointer,  
intnode.  Later,  the  variable  is  deallocated  by  the  delete  operator.  C++ 
requires the explicit deallocation operator delete, because it does not use 
implicit storage reclamation, such as garbage collection.

In Java, all data except the primitive scalars are objects. Java objects are 
explicitly heap dynamic and are accessed through reference variables. Java has 
no way of explicitly destroying a heap-dynamic variable; rather, implicit gar-
bage collection is used. Garbage collection is discussed in Chapter 6.

C# has both explicit heap-dynamic and stack-dynamic objects, all of which are 
implicitly deallocated. In addition, C# supports C++-style pointers. Such pointers 
are used to reference heap, stack, and even static variables and objects. These point-
ers have the same dangers as those of C++, and the objects they reference on the 
heap are not implicitly deallocated. Pointers are included in C# to allow C# com-
ponents to interoperate with C and C++ components. To discourage their use, and 
also to make clear to any program reader that the code uses pointers, the header of 
any method that defines a pointer must include the reserved word unsafe.

Explicit heap-dynamic variables are often used to construct dynamic struc-
tures, such as linked lists and trees, that need to grow and/or shrink during exe-
cution. Such structures can be built conveniently using pointers or references 
and explicit heap-dynamic variables.

The disadvantages of explicit heap-dynamic variables are the difficulty of 
using pointer and reference variables correctly, the cost of references to the 
variables, and the complexity of the required storage management implemen-
tation. This is essentially the problem of heap management, which is costly and 
complicated. Implementation methods for explicit heap-dynamic variables are 
discussed at length in Chapter 6.

5.4.3.4  Implicit Heap-Dynamic Variables

Implicit heap-dynamic variables are bound to heap storage only when they 
are assigned values. In fact, all their attributes are bound every time they are 
assigned. For example, consider the following JavaScript assignment statement:

highs = [74, 84, 86, 90, 71];

Regardless of whether the variable named highs was previously used in the 
program or what it was used for, it is now an array of five numeric values.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   210

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
5.5  Scope

5.5  Scope 

  211

The advantage of such variables is that they have the highest degree of 
f lexibility, allowing highly generic code to be written. One disadvantage of 
implicit heap-dynamic variables is the run-time overhead of maintaining all 
the dynamic attributes, which could include array subscript types and ranges, 
among others. Another disadvantage is the loss of some error detection by the 
compiler, as discussed in Section 5.4.2.2.

One of the important factors in understanding variables is scope. The scope of 
a variable is the range of statements in which the variable is visible. A variable 
is visible in a statement if it can be referenced or assigned in that statement.

The scope rules of a language determine how a particular occurrence of a 
name is associated with a variable, or in the case of a functional language, how a 
name is associated with an expression. In particular, scope rules determine how 
references to variables declared outside the currently executing subprogram or 
block are associated with their declarations and thus their attributes (blocks are 
discussed in Section 5.5.2). A clear understanding of these rules for a language 
is therefore essential to the ability to write or read programs in that language.
A variable is local in a program unit or block if it is declared there. The 
nonlocal variables of a program unit or block are those that are visible within 
the program unit or block but are not declared there. Global variables are a 
special category of nonlocal variables, which are discussed in Section 5.5.4.

Scoping  issues  of  classes,  packages,  and  namespaces  are  discussed  in 

 Chapter 11.

5.5.1  Static Scope

ALGOL 60 introduced the method of binding names to nonlocal variables 
called static scoping,5 which has been copied by many subsequent imperative 
languages  and  many  nonimperative  languages  as  well.  Static  scoping  is  so 
named because the scope of a variable can be statically determined—that is, 
prior to execution. This permits a human program reader (and a compiler) to 
determine the type of every variable in the program simply by examining its 
source code.

There are two categories of static-scoped languages: those in which sub-
programs can be nested, which creates nested static scopes, and those in which 
subprograms cannot be nested. In the latter category, static scopes are also 
created by subprograms but nested scopes are created only by nested class 
definitions and blocks.

Ada, JavaScript, Common Lisp, Scheme, Fortran 2003+, F#, and Python 

allow nested subprograms, but the C-based languages do not.

5.  Static scoping is sometimes called lexical scoping.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   211

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
212 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

Our discussion of static scoping in this section focuses on those languages 
that allow nested subprograms. Initially, we assume that all scopes are associ-
ated with program units and that all referenced nonlocal variables are declared 
in other program units.6 In this chapter, it is assumed that scoping is the only 
method of accessing nonlocal variables in the languages under discussion. This 
is not true for all languages. It is not even true for all languages that use static 
scoping, but the assumption simplifies the discussion here.

When the reader of a program finds a reference to a variable, the attri-
butes of the variable can be determined by finding the statement in which it is 
declared (either explicitly or implicitly). In static-scoped languages with nested 
subprograms, this process can be thought of in the following way. Suppose a 
reference is made to a variable x in subprogram sub1. The correct declaration 
is found by first searching the declarations of subprogram sub1. If no decla-
ration is found for the variable there, the search continues in the declarations 
of the subprogram that declared subprogram sub1, which is called its static 
parent. If a declaration of x is not found there, the search continues to the next-
larger enclosing unit (the unit that declared sub1’s parent), and so forth, until a 
declaration for x is found or the largest unit’s declarations have been searched 
without success. In that case, an undeclared variable error is reported. The 
static parent of subprogram sub1, and its static parent, and so forth up to and 
including the largest enclosing subprogram, are called the static ancestors of 
sub1. Actual implementation techniques for static scoping, which are discussed 
in Chapter 10, are usually much more efficient than the process just described.
Consider the following JavaScript function, big, in which the two func-

tions sub1 and sub2 are nested:

function  big() {
  function  sub1() {
    var  x = 7;
    sub2();
  }
  function  sub2() {
    var  y = x;
  }
  var  x = 3;
  sub1();
}

Under static scoping, the reference to the variable x in sub2 is to the x declared 
in the procedure big. This is true because the search for x begins in the pro-
cedure in which the reference occurs, sub2, but no declaration for x is found 
there. The search continues in the static parent of sub2, big, where the dec-
laration of x is found. The x declared in sub1 is ignored, because it is not in 
the static ancestry of sub2.

6.  Nonlocal variables not defined in other program units are discussed in Section 5.5.4.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   212

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
 
5.5  Scope 

  213

In some languages that use static scoping, regardless of whether nested 
subprograms are allowed, some variable declarations can be hidden from some 
other code segments. For example, consider again the JavaScript function big. 
The variable x is declared in both big and in sub1, which is nested inside big. 
Within sub1, every simple reference to x is to the local x. Therefore, the outer 
x is hidden from sub1.

5.5.2  Blocks

Many languages allow new static scopes to be defined in the midst of executable 
code. This powerful concept, introduced in ALGOL 60, allows a section of 
code to have its own local variables whose scope is minimized. Such variables 
are typically stack dynamic, so their storage is allocated when the section is 
entered and deallocated when the section is exited. Such a section of code 
is called a block. Blocks provide the origin of the phrase block-structured 
language.

The  C-based  languages  allow  any  compound  statement  (a  statement 
sequence surrounded by matched braces) to have declarations and thereby 
define a new scope. Such compound statements are called blocks. For example, 
if list were an integer array, one could write the following:

if (list[i] < list[j]) {
  int temp;
  temp = list[i];
  list[i] = list[j];
  list[j] = temp;
}

The scopes created by blocks, which could be nested in larger blocks, are 
treated exactly like those created by subprograms. References to variables in 
a block that are not declared there are connected to declarations by searching 
enclosing scopes (blocks or subprograms) in order of increasing size.

Consider the following skeletal C function:

void sub() {
  int count;
  . . .
  while (. . .) {
    int count;
    count++;
    . . .
  }
  . . .
}

The reference to count in the while loop is to that loop’s local count. In this 
case, the count of sub is hidden from the code inside the while loop. In gen-
eral, a declaration for a variable effectively hides any declaration of a variable 

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   213

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
214 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

with the same name in a larger enclosing scope.7 Note that this code is legal in 
C and C++ but illegal in Java and C#. The designers of Java and C# believed 
that the reuse of names in nested blocks was too error prone to be allowed.

Although JavaScript uses static scoping for its nested functions, nonfunc-

tion blocks cannot be defined in the language.

Most functional programming languages include a construct that is related 
to the blocks of the imperative languages, usually named let. These constructs 
have two parts, the first of which is to bind names to values, usually specified 
as expressions. The second part is an expression that uses the names defined 
in the first part. Programs in functional languages are comprised of expres-
sions, rather than statements. Therefore, the final part of a let construct is an 
expression, rather than a statement. In Scheme, a let construct is a call to the 
function LET with the following form:

(LET (

  (name1 expression1)
  . . .
  (namen expressionn))
  expression

)

The semantics of the call to LET is as follows: The first n expressions are 
evaluated and the values are assigned to the associated names. Then, the final 
expression is evaluated and the return value of LET is that value. This differs 
from a block in an imperative language in that the names are of values; they 
are not variables in the imperative sense. Once set, they cannot be changed. 
However, they are like local variables in a block in an imperative language in 
that their scope is local to the call to LET. Consider the following call to LET:

(LET (
  (top (+ a b))
  (bottom (- c d)))
  (/ top bottom)
)

This call computes and returns the value of the expression (a + b) / (c - d).

In ML, the form of a let construct is as follows:

let
  val  name1 = expression1
  . . .
  val  namen = expressionn
in
  expression
end;

7.  As discussed in Section 5.5.4, in C++, such hidden global variables can be accessed in the 

inner scope using the scope operator (::).

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   214

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
 
Each val statement binds a name to an expression. As with Scheme, the 
names in the first part are like the named constants of imperative languages; 
once set, they cannot be changed.8 Consider the following let construct:

5.5  Scope 

  215

let
  val  top = a + b
  val bottom = c - d
in
  top / bottom
end; 

The general form of a let construct in F# is as follows:

let left_side = expression

The left_side of let can be a name or a tuple pattern (a sequence of names 

separated by commas).

The scope of a name defined with let inside a function definition is from 
the end of the defining expression to the end of the function. The scope of let 
can be limited by indenting the following code, which creates a new local scope. 
Although any indentation will work, the convention is that the indentation is 
four spaces. Consider the following code:

let n1 =
    let  n2 = 7
    let  n3 = n2 + 3
    n3;;
let n4 = n3 + n1;;

The scope of n1 extends over all of the code. However, the scope of n2 and 
n3 ends when the indentation ends. So, the use of n3 in the last let causes an 
error. The last line of the let n1 scope is the value bound to n1; it could be 
any expression.

Chapter 15 includes more details of the let constructs in Scheme, ML, 

Haskell, and F#.

5.5.3  Declaration Order

In C89, as well as in some other languages, all data declarations in a func-
tion except those in nested blocks must appear at the beginning of the func-
tion. However, some languages—for example, C99, C++, Java, JavaScript, and 
C#—allow variable declarations to appear anywhere a statement can appear in 
a program unit. Declarations may create scopes that are not associated with 
compound statements or subprograms. For example, in C99, C++, and Java, the 
scope of all local variables is from their declarations to the ends of the blocks 
in which those declarations appear.

8.  In Chapter 15, we will see that they can be reset, but that the process actually creates a new 

name.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   215

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
216 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

In the official documentation for C#, the scope of any variable declared in a 
block is said to be the whole block, regardless of the position of the declaration 
in the block, as long as it is not in a nested block. The same is true for methods. 
However, this is misleading, because the C# language definition requires that 
all variables be declared before they are used. Therefore, although the scope 
of a variable is said to extend from the declaration to the top of the block or 
subprogram in which that declaration appears, the variable still cannot be used 
above its declaration.

Recall that C# does not allow the declaration of a variable in a nested block 
to have the same name as a variable in a nesting scope. This, together with the 
rule that the scope of a declaration is the whole block, makes the following 
nested declaration of x illegal:

{
  {int  x;  // Illegal
  ...
  }
  int  x;
}

Note that C# still requires that all be declared before they are used. There-
fore, although the scope of a variable extends from the declaration to the top 
of the block or subprogram in which that declaration appears, the variable still 
cannot be used above its declaration.

In JavaScript, local variables can be declared anywhere in a function, but 
the scope of such a variable is always the entire function. If used before its 
declaration in the function, such a variable has the value undefined. The 
reference is not illegal.

The for statements of C++, Java, and C# allow variable definitions in their 
initialization expressions. In early versions of C++, the scope of such a variable 
was from its definition to the end of the smallest enclosing block. In the stan-
dard version, however, the scope is restricted to the for construct, as is the case 
with Java and C#. Consider the following skeletal method:

void  fun() {
   . . .
   for (int  count = 0; count < 10; count++){
     . . .
   }
   . . .
}

In later versions of C++, as well as in Java and C#, the scope of count is from 
the for statement to the end of its body (the right brace).

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   216

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
5.5.4  Global Scope

5.5  Scope 

  217

Some languages, including C, C++, PHP, JavaScript, and Python, allow a 
program structure that is a sequence of function definitions, in which variable 
definitions can appear outside the functions. Definitions outside functions 
in  a  file  create  global  variables,  which  potentially  can  be  visible  to  those 
functions.

C and C++ have both declarations and definitions of global data. Declara-
tions specify types and other attributes but do not cause allocation of storage. 
Definitions specify attributes and cause storage allocation. For a specific global 
name, a C program can have any number of compatible declarations, but only 
a single definition.

A declaration of a variable outside function definitions specifies that the 
variable is defined in a different file. A global variable in C is implicitly visible 
in all subsequent functions in the file, except those that include a declaration 
of a local variable with the same name. A global variable that is defined after a 
function can be made visible in the function by declaring it to be external, as 
in the following:

extern int  sum;

In C99, definitions of global variables usually have initial values. Declarations 
of global variables never have initial values. If the declaration is outside function 
definitions, it need not include the extern qualifier.

This idea of declarations and definitions carries over to the functions 
of C and C++, where prototypes declare names and interfaces of functions 
but do not provide their code. Function definitions, on the other hand, are 
complete.

In C++, a global variable that is hidden by a local with the same name can 
be accessed using the scope operator (::). For example, if x is a global that 
is hidden in a function by a local named x, the global could be referenced 
as ::x.

PHP statements can be interspersed with function definitions. Variables in 
PHP are implicitly declared when they appear in statements. Any variable that 
is implicitly declared outside any function is a global variable; variables implic-
itly declared in functions are local variables. The scope of global variables 
extends from their declarations to the end of the program but skips over any 
subsequent function definitions. So, global variables are not implicitly visible 
in any function. Global variables can be made visible in functions in their scope 
in two ways: (1) If the function includes a local variable with the same name 
as a global, that global can be accessed through the $GLOBALS array, using 
the name of the global as a string literal subscript, and (2) if there is no local 
variable in the function with the same name as the global, the global can be 

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   217

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
218 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

made visible by including it in a global declaration statement. Consider the 
following example:

$day = "Monday";
$month = "January";

function calendar() {
  $day = "Tuesday";
  global $month;
  print "local day is $day  ";
  $gday = $GLOBALS['day'];
  print "global day is $gday <br \>";
  print "global month is $month ";
}

calendar();

Interpretation of this code produces the following:

local day is Tuesday
global day is Monday
global month is January

The global variables of JavaScript are very similar to those of PHP, except 
that there is no way to access a global variable in a function that has declared a 
local variable with the same name.

The visibility rules for global variables in Python are unusual. Variables 
are not normally declared, as in PHP. They are implicitly declared when they 
appear as the targets of assignment statements. A global variable can be ref-
erenced in a function, but a global variable can be assigned in a function only 
if it has been declared to be global in the function. Consider the following 
examples:

day = "Monday"

def tester():
print "The global day is:", day

tester()

The  output  of  this  script,  because  globals  can  be  referenced  directly  in 
 functions, is as follows:

The global day is: Monday

The following script attempts to assign a new value to the global day:

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   218

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
5.5  Scope 

  219

day = "Monday"

def  tester():
  print "The global day is:", day
  day = "Tuesday"
  print "The new value of day is:", day

tester()

This script creates an UnboundLocalError error message, because the assign-
ment to day in the second line of the body of the function makes day a local 
variable, which makes the reference to day in the first line of the body of the 
function an illegal forward reference to the local.

The assignment to day can be to the global variable if day is declared to 
be global at the beginning of the function. This prevents the assignment to day 
from creating a local variable. This is shown in the following script:

day = "Monday"

def tester():
  global  day
  print  "The global day is:", day
  day = "Tuesday"
  print  "The new value of day is:", day

tester()

The output of this script is as follows:

The global day is: Monday
The new value of day is: Tuesday

Functions can be nested in Python. Variables defined in nesting functions 
are accessible in a nested function through static scoping, but such variables 
must  be  declared  nonlocal  in  the  nested  function.9  An  example  skeletal 
 program in Section 5.7 illustrates accesses to nonlocal variables.

All names defined outside function definitions in F# are globals. Their 

scope extends from their definitions to the end of the file.

Declaration  order  and global  variables are also issues  in  the  class and 
member declarations in object-oriented languages. These are discussed in 
Chapter 12.

9.  The nonlocal reserved word was introduced in Python 3.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   219

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
220 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

5.5.5  Evaluation of Static Scoping

Static scoping provides a method of nonlocal access that works well in many 
situations. However, it is not without its problems. First, in most cases it allows 
more access to both variables and subprograms than is necessary. It is simply 
too crude a tool for concisely specifying such restrictions. Second, and perhaps 
more important, is a problem related to program evolution. Software is highly 
dynamic—programs that are used regularly continually change. These changes 
often  result  in  restructuring,  thereby  destroying  the  initial  structure  that 
restricted variable and subprogram access in a static-scoped language. To avoid 
the complexity of maintaining these access restrictions, developers often dis-
card structure when it gets in the way. Thus, getting around the restrictions of 
static scoping can lead to program designs that bear little resemblance to the 
original, even in areas of the program in which changes have not been made. 
Designers are encouraged to use far more globals than are necessary. All sub-
programs can end up being nested at the same level, in the main program, using 
globals instead of deeper levels of nesting.10 Moreover, the final design may be 
awkward  and  contrived,  and  it  may  not  ref lect  the  underlying  conceptual 
design. These and other defects of static scoping are discussed in detail in 
Clarke, Wileden, and Wolf (1980). An alternative to the use of static scoping 
to control access to variables and subprograms is an encapsulation construct, 
which  is  included  in  many  newer  languages.  Encapsulation  constructs  are 
 discussed in Chapter 11.

5.5.6  Dynamic Scope

The scope of variables in APL, SNOBOL4, and the early versions of Lisp is 
dynamic. Perl and Common Lisp also allow variables to be declared to have 
dynamic scope, although the default scoping mechanism in these languages is 
static. Dynamic scoping is based on the calling sequence of subprograms, not 
on their spatial relationship to each other. Thus, the scope can be determined 
only at run time.

Consider again the function big from Section 5.5.1, which is reproduced 

here, minus the function calls:

function  big() {
  function  sub1() {
    var  x = 7;
  }
  function  sub2() {
    var  y = x;
    var  z = 3;
  }
  var  x = 3;
}

10.  Sounds like the structure of a C program, doesn’t it?

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   220

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
 
5.5  Scope 

  221

Assume that dynamic-scoping rules apply to nonlocal references. The meaning 
of the identifier x referenced in sub2 is dynamic—it cannot be determined 
at compile time. It may reference the variable from either declaration of x, 
depending on the calling sequence.

One way the correct meaning of x can be determined during execution is 
to begin the search with the local declarations. This is also the way the process 
begins with static scoping, but that is where the similarity between the two 
techniques ends. When the search of local declarations fails, the declarations 
of the dynamic parent, or calling function, are searched. If a declaration for 
x is not found there, the search continues in that function’s dynamic parent, 
and so forth, until a declaration for x is found. If none is found in any dynamic 
ancestor, it is a run-time error.

Consider the two different call sequences for sub2 in the earlier example. 
First, big calls sub1, which calls sub2. In this case, the search proceeds from 
the local procedure, sub2, to its caller, sub1, where a declaration for x is found. 
So, the reference to x in sub2 in this case is to the x declared in sub1. Next, 
sub2 is called directly from big. In this case, the dynamic parent of sub2 is 
big, and the reference is to the x declared in big.

Note that if static scoping were used, in either calling sequence discussed, 

the reference to x in sub2 would be to big’s x.

Perl’s dynamic scoping is unusual—in fact, it is not exactly like that dis-
cussed  in  this  section,  although  the  semantics  are  often  that  of  traditional 
dynamic scoping (see Programming Exercise 1).

5.5.7  Evaluation of Dynamic Scoping

The effect of dynamic scoping on programming is profound. When dynamic 
scoping is used, the correct attributes of nonlocal variables visible to a program 
statement cannot be determined statically. Furthermore, a reference to the 
name of such a variable is not always to the same variable. A statement in a sub-
program that contains a reference to a nonlocal variable can refer to different 
nonlocal variables during different executions of the subprogam. Several kinds 
of programming problems follow directly from dynamic scoping.

First, during the time span beginning when a subprogram begins its exe-
cution and ending when that execution ends, the local variables of the subpro-
gram are all visible to any other executing subprogram, regardless of its textual 
proximity or how execution got to the currently executing subprogram. There 
is no way to protect local variables from this accessibility. Subprograms are 
always executed in the environment of all previously called subprograms that 
have not yet completed their executions. As a result, dynamic scoping results 
in less reliable programs than static scoping.

A second problem with dynamic scoping is the inability to type check 
references to nonlocals statically. This problem results from the inability to 
statically find the declaration for a variable referenced as a nonlocal.

Dynamic  scoping  also  makes  programs  much  more  difficult  to  read, 
because the calling sequence of subprograms must be known to determine the 

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   221

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
222 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

meaning of references to nonlocal variables. This task can be virtually impos-
sible for a human reader.

Finally, accesses to nonlocal variables in dynamic-scoped languages take 
far longer than accesses to nonlocals when static scoping is used. The reason 
for this is explained in Chapter 10.

On the other hand, dynamic scoping is not without merit. In many cases, 
the parameters passed from one subprogram to another are variables that are 
defined in the caller. None of these needs to be passed in a dynamically scoped 
language, because they are implicitly visible in the called subprogram.

It is not difficult to understand why dynamic scoping is not as widely used 
as static scoping. Programs in static-scoped languages are easier to read, are 
more reliable, and execute faster than equivalent programs in dynamic-scoped 
languages. It was precisely for these reasons that dynamic scoping was replaced 
by static scoping in most current dialects of Lisp. Implementation methods for 
both static and dynamic scoping are discussed in Chapter 10.

5.6  Scope and Lifetime

Sometimes  the  scope  and  lifetime  of  a  variable  appear  to  be  related.  For 
example, consider a variable that is declared in a Java method that contains 
no method calls. The scope of such a variable is from its declaration to the 
end of the method. The lifetime of that variable is the period of time begin-
ning when the method is entered and ending when execution of the method 
terminates. Although the scope and lifetime of the variable are clearly not the 
same, because static scope is a textual, or spatial, concept whereas lifetime is a 
temporal concept, they at least appear to be related in this case.

This apparent relationship between scope and lifetime does not hold in other 
situations. In C and C++, for example, a variable that is declared in a function 
using the specifier static is statically bound to the scope of that function and is 
also statically bound to storage. So, its scope is static and local to the function, but 
its lifetime extends over the entire execution of the program of which it is a part.
Scope and lifetime are also unrelated when subprogram calls are involved. 

Consider the following C++ functions:

void printheader() {
  . . .
 } /* end of printheader */
void compute() {
  int sum;
  . . .
  printheader();
 } /* end of compute */

The scope of the variable sum is completely contained within the compute 
function. It does not extend to the body of the function printheader, although 
printheader executes in the midst of the execution of compute. However, the 

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   222

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
5.7  Referencing Environments 

  223

lifetime of sum extends over the time during which printheader executes. 
Whatever storage location sum is bound to before the call to printheader, 
that binding will continue during and after the execution of printheader.

5.7  Referencing Environments

The referencing environment of a statement is the collection of all variables 
that are visible in the statement. The referencing environment of a statement in 
a static-scoped language is the variables declared in its local scope plus the col-
lection of all variables of its ancestor scopes that are visible. In such a language, 
the referencing environment of a statement is needed while that statement is 
being compiled, so code and data structures can be created to allow references 
to variables from other scopes during run time. Techniques for implementing 
references to nonlocal variables in both static- and dynamic-scoped languages 
are discussed in Chapter 10.

In Python, scopes can be created by function definitions. The referencing 
environment of a statement includes the local variables, plus all of the variables 
declared in the functions in which the statement is nested (excluding variables 
in nonlocal scopes that are hidden by declarations in nearer functions). Each 
function definition creates a new scope and thus a new environment. Consider 
the following Python skeletal program:

g = 3; # A global

def sub1():
    a = 5; # Creates a local
    b = 7; # Creates another local
    . . . <------------------------------ 1
  def  sub2():
  global g;  # Global g is now assignable here
    c = 9;  # Creates a new local
    . . . <------------------------------ 2
    def  sub3():
      nonlocal  c:  # Makes nonlocal c visible here
      g = 11;  # Creates a new local
      . . . <------------------------------ 3

The referencing environments of the indicated program points are as follows:

Point

Referencing Environment

1

2

3

local a and b (of sub1), global g for reference, 
but not for assignment

local c (of sub2), global g for both reference 
and for assignment

nonlocal c (of sub2), local g (of sub3)

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   223

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
224 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

Now consider the variable declarations of this skeletal program. First, note 
that, although the scope of sub1 is at a higher level (it is less deeply nested) than 
sub3, the scope of sub1 is not a static ancestor of sub3, so sub3 does not have 
access to the variables declared in sub1. There is a good reason for this. The 
variables declared in sub1 are stack dynamic, so they are not bound to storage 
if sub1 is not in execution. Because sub3 can be in execution when sub1 is not, 
it cannot be allowed to access variables in sub1, which would not necessarily 
be bound to storage during the execution of sub3.

A subprogram is active if its execution has begun but has not yet terminated. 
The referencing environment of a statement in a dynamically scoped language 
is the locally declared variables, plus the variables of all other  subprograms 
that are currently active. Once again, some variables in active subprograms can 
be hidden from the referencing environment. Recent subprogram activations 
can have declarations for variables that hide variables with the same names in 
previous subprogram activations.

Consider the following example program. Assume that the only function 

calls are the following: main calls sub2, which calls sub1.

void sub1() {
  int a, b;
  . . . <------------ 1
}  /* end of sub1 */
void sub2() {
  int b, c;
  . . . . <------------ 2
  sub1();
}  /* end of sub2 */
void main() {
  int c, d;
  . . . <------------ 3
  sub2();
}  /* end of main */

The  referencing  environments  of  the  indicated  program  points  are  as 

follows:

Point

Referencing Environment

1

2
3

a and b of sub1, c of sub2, d of main, (c of 
main and b of sub2 are hidden)
b and c of sub2, d of main, (c of main is hidden)
c and d of main

5.8  Named Constants

A named constant is a variable that is bound to a value only once. Named con-
stants are useful as aids to readability and program reliability. Readability can be 
improved, for example, using the name pi instead of the constant 3.14159265.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   224

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
5.8  Named Constants 

  225

Another important use of named constants is to parameterize a program. 
For example, consider a program that processes a fixed number of data values, 
say 100. Such a program usually uses the constant 100 in a number of locations 
for declaring array subscript ranges and for loop control limits. Consider the 
following skeletal Java program segment:

void example() {
  int[] intList = new int[100];
  String[] strList =  new  String[100];
  . . .
  for  (index = 0; index < 100; index++) {
    . . .
  }
  . . .
  for  (index = 0; index < 100; index++) {
    . . .
  }
  . . .
  average = sum / 100;
  . . .
}

When this program must be modified to deal with a different number of data 
values, all occurrences of 100 must be found and changed. On a large program, 
this can be tedious and error prone. An easier and more reliable method is to 
use a named constant as a program parameter, as follows:

void example() {
  final int  len = 100;
  int[] intList =  new int[len];
  String[] strList =  new  String[len];
  . . .
  for (index = 0; index < len; index++) {
    . . .
  }
  . . .
  for (index = 0; index < len; index++) {
    . . .
  }
  . . .
  average = sum / len;
  . . .
}

Now, when the length must be changed, only one line must be changed 
(the variable len), regardless of the number of times it is used in the pro-
gram. This is another example of the benefits of abstraction. The name len 
is an abstraction for the number of elements in some arrays and the number 
of  iterations  in  some  loops.  This  illustrates  how  named  constants  can  aid 
modifiability.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   225

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
226 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

C++ allows dynamic binding of values to named constants. This allows 
expressions containing variables to be assigned to constants in the declarations. 
For example, the C++ statement

const int  result = 2 * width + 1;

declares result to be an integer type named constant whose value is set to the 
value of the expression 2 * width + 1, where the value of the variable width 
must be visible when result is allocated and bound to its value.

Java also allows dynamic binding of values to named constants. In Java, 
named constants are defined with the final reserved word (as in the earlier 
example). The initial value can be given in the declaration statement or in a 
subsequent assignment statement. The assigned value can be specified with 
any expression.

C# has two kinds of named constants: those defined with const and those 
defined with readonly. The const named constants, which are implicitly 
static, are statically bound to values; that is, they are bound to values at com-
pile time, which means those values can be specified only with literals or other 
const  members.  The  readonly  named  constants,  which  are  dynamically 
bound to values, can be assigned in the declaration or with a static constructor.11 
So, if a program needs a constant-valued object whose value is the same on 
every use of the program, a const constant is used. However, if a program 
needs a constant-valued object whose value is determined only when the object 
is created and can be different for different executions of the program, then a 
readonly constant is used.

The discussion of binding values to named constants naturally leads to the 
topic of initialization, because binding a value to a named constant is the same 
process, except it is permanent.

In many instances, it is convenient for variables to have values before the 
code of the program or subprogram in which they are declared begins execut-
ing. The binding of a variable to a value at the time it is bound to storage is 
called initialization. If the variable is statically bound to storage, binding and 
initialization occur before run time. In these cases, the initial value must be 
specified as a literal or an expression whose only nonliteral operands are named 
constants that have already been defined. If the storage binding is dynamic, 
initialization is also dynamic and the initial values can be any expression.

In most languages, initialization is specified on the declaration that creates 

the variable. For example, in C++, we could have

int sum = 0;
int* ptrSum = &sum;
char name[] = "George Washington Carver";

11.  Static constructors in C# run at some indeterminate time before the class is instantiated.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   226

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
 
S U M M A R Y

Review Questions 

  227

Case sensitivity and the use of underscores are the design issues for names.

Variables can be characterized by the sextuple of attributes: name, address, 

value, type, lifetime, and scope.

Aliases are two or more variables bound to the same storage address. They 
are regarded as detrimental to reliability but are difficult to eliminate entirely 
from a language.

Binding  is  the  association  of  attributes  with  program  entities.  Knowl-
edge of the binding times of attributes to entities is essential to understanding 
the semantics of programming languages. Binding can be static or dynamic. 
 Declarations, either explicit or implicit, provide a means of specifying the static 
binding of variables to types. In general, dynamic binding allows greater f lex-
ibility but at the expense of readability, efficiency, and reliability.

Scalar variables can be separated into four categories by considering their 
lifetimes: static, stack dynamic, explicit heap dynamic, and implicit heap dynamic.
Static scoping is a central feature of ALGOL 60 and some of its descendants. 
It provides a simple, reliable, and efficient method of allowing visibility of non-
local variables in subprograms. Dynamic scoping provides more f lexibility than 
static scoping but, again, at the expense of readability, reliability, and efficiency.
Most functional languages allow the user to create local scopes with let 

constructs, which limit the scope of their defined names.

The referencing environment of a statement is the collection of all of the 

variables that are visible to that statement.

Named constants are simply variables that are bound to values only once.

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  What are the design issues for names?

2.  What is the potential danger of case-sensitive names?

3.  What is an alias?

4.  Which category of C++ reference variables always produces aliases?
5.  What is the l-value of a variable? What is the r-value?
6.  Define binding and binding time.
7.  After language design and implementation, what are the four times 

bindings can take place in a program?
8.  Define static binding and dynamic binding.
9.  What are the advantages and disadvantages of implicit declarations?

10.  What are the advantages and disadvantages of dynamic type binding?
11.  Define static, stack-dynamic, explicit heap-dynamic, and implicit heap-dynamic 

variables. What are their advantages and disadvantages?

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   227

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
228 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

12.  Define lifetime, scope, static scope, and dynamic scope.
13.  How is a reference to a nonlocal variable in a static-scoped program 

connected to its definition?

14.  What is the general problem with static scoping?

15.  What is the referencing environment of a statement?

16.  What is a static ancestor of a subprogram? What is a dynamic ancestor 

of a subprogram?

17.  What is a block?

18.  What is the purpose of the let constructs in functional languages?

19.  What is the difference between the names defined in an ML let 

construct from the variables declared in a C block?

20.  Describe the encapsulation of an F# let inside a function and outside all 

functions.

21.  What are the advantages and disadvantages of dynamic scoping?

22.  What are the advantages of named constants?

P R O B L E M   S E T

1.  Which of the following identifier forms is most readable? Support your 

decision.

SumOfSales

sum_of_sales

SUMOFSALES

2.  Some programming languages are typeless. What are the obvious 
advantages and disadvantages of having no types in a language?

3.  Write a simple assignment statement with one arithmetic operator in 

some language you know. For each component of the statement, list the 
various bindings that are required to determine the semantics when the 
statement is executed. For each binding, indicate the binding time used 
for the language.

4.  Dynamic type binding is closely related to implicit heap-dynamic 

variables. Explain this relationship.

5.  Describe a situation when a history-sensitive variable in a subprogram is 

useful.

6.  Consider the following JavaScript skeletal program:

// The main program
var  x;

function  sub1() {

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   228

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
Problem Set 

  229

  var  x;

  function  sub2() {

    . . .

  }

}

function  sub3() {

  . . .
}

Assume that the execution of this program is in the following unit 
order:
main calls sub1
sub1 calls sub2
sub2 calls sub3

a.  Assuming static scoping, in the following, which declaration of x is the 

correct one for a reference to x?

i.  sub1
ii.  sub2
iii.  sub3

b.  Repeat part a, but assume dynamic scoping.

7.  Assume the following JavaScript program was interpreted using 

static-scoping rules. What value of x is displayed in function sub1? 
Under dynamic-scoping rules, what value of x is displayed in function 
sub1?

var x;
function  sub1() {

  document.write("x = " + x + "");
}

function  sub2() {
   var x;

   x = 10;

   sub1();
}

x = 5;

sub2();

8.  Consider the following JavaScript program:

var  x, y, z;
function  sub1() {

  var  a, y, z;

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   229

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
230 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

  function sub2() {

    var  a, b, z;

    . . .

  }

  . . .

}

function  sub3() {

  var  a, x, w;

  . . .

}

List all the variables, along with the program units where they are 
declared, that are visible in the bodies of sub1, sub2, and sub3, assum-
ing static scoping is used.

9.  Consider the following Python program:

x = 1;

y = 3;

z = 5;

def sub1():

  a = 7;

  y = 9;

  z = 11;

  . . .

def sub2():

  global  x;

  a = 13;

  x = 15;

  w = 17;

  . . .

  def sub3():

    nonlocal  a;

    a = 19;

    b = 21;

    z = 23;

    . . .

. . .

List all the variables, along with the program units where they are 
declared, that are visible in the bodies of sub1, sub2, and sub3, assum-
ing static scoping is used.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   230

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
Problem Set 

  231

10.  Consider the following C program:

void fun(void) {

  int a, b, c; /* definition 1 */

  . . .

  while (. . .) {

    int b, c, d; /*definition 2 */

    . . . <-------------  1

    while (. . .) {

    int c, d, e; /* definition 3 */

    . . . <-------------  2

    }

   . . . <--------------  3

   }

  . . . <----------------  4

}

For each of the four marked points in this function, list each visible 
 variable, along with the number of the definition statement that defines it.

11.  Consider the following skeletal C program:

void fun1(void);  /* prototype */
void fun2(void);  /* prototype */
void fun3(void);  /* prototype */
void main() {

  int a, b, c;

  . . .

 }

void  fun1(void) {

  int  b, c, d;

  . . .

 }

void  fun2(void) {

  int  c, d, e;

  . . .

 }

void  fun3(void) {

  int  d, e, f;

  . . .

 }

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   231

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
232 

  Chapter 5  

 Names, Bindings, and Scopes 

Given the following calling sequences and assuming that dynamic scop-
ing is used, what variables are visible during execution of the last func-
tion called? Include with each visible variable the name of the function in 
which it was defined.
a.  main calls fun1; fun1 calls fun2; fun2 calls fun3.

b.  main calls fun1; fun1 calls fun3.

c.  main calls fun2; fun2 calls fun3; fun3 calls fun1.

d.  main calls fun3; fun3 calls fun1.

e.  main calls fun1; fun1 calls fun3; fun3 calls fun2.

f.  main calls fun3; fun3 calls fun2; fun2 calls fun1.

12.  Consider the following program, written in JavaScript-like syntax:

// main program
var  x, y, z;

function  sub1() {

var  a, y, z;

. . .

}

function  sub2() {

  var  a, b, z;

  . . .

}

function  sub3() {

  var  a, x, w;

  . . .

}

Given the following calling sequences and assuming that dynamic scop-
ing is used, what variables are visible during execution of the last subpro-
gram activated? Include with each visible variable the name of the unit 
where it is declared.

a.  main calls sub1; sub1 calls sub2; sub2 calls sub3.

b.  main calls sub1; sub1 calls sub3.

c.  main calls sub2; sub2 calls sub3; sub3 calls sub1.

d.  main calls sub3; sub3 calls sub1.

e.  main calls sub1; sub1 calls sub3; sub3 calls sub2.

f.  main calls sub3; sub3 calls sub2; sub2 calls sub1.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   232

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
 
P R O G R A M M I N G   E X E R C I S E S

Programming Exercises 

  233

1.  Perl allows both static and a kind of dynamic scoping. Write a Perl 
program that uses both and clearly shows the difference in effect of 
the two. Explain clearly the difference between the dynamic scoping 
described in this chapter and that implemented in Perl.

2.  Write a Common Lisp program that clearly shows the difference 

between static and dynamic scoping.

3.  Write a JavaScript script that has subprograms nested three deep and in 
which each nested subprogram references variables defined in all of its 
enclosing subprograms.

4.  Repeat Programming Exercise 3 with Python.
5.  Write a C99 function that includes the following sequence of statements:

x = 21;
int x;
x = 42;

Run the program and explain the results. Rewrite the same code in C++ 
and Java and compare the results.

6.  Write test programs in C++, Java, and C# to determine the scope of 
a variable declared in a for statement. Specifically, the code must 
determine whether such a variable is visible after the body of the for 
statement.

7.  Write three functions in C or C++: one that declares a large array 
statically, one that declares the same large array on the stack, and 
one that creates the same large array from the heap. Call each of the 
subprograms a large number of times (at least 100,000) and output the 
time required by each. Explain the results.

M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   233

1/5/18   10:39 PM

 
 
 
M05_SEBE8029_12_SE_C05.indd   234

1/5/18   10:39 PM
