# Fuente
- archivo: 259-324.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/Robert W. Sebesta - Concepts of Programming Languages-Pearson (2019)/259-324.pdf
- extraido: 2026-03-26T16:13:17

# Contenido

6 

Data Types

  6.1  Introduction

  6.2  Primitive Data Types

  6.3  Character String Types

  6.4  Enumeration Types

  6.5  Array Types

  6.6  Associative Arrays

  6.7  Record Types

  6.8  Tuple Types

  6.9  List Types

 6.10  Union Types

 6.11  Pointer and Reference Types

 6.12  Optional Types

 6.13  Type Checking

 6.14  Strong Typing

 6.15  Type Equivalence

 6.16  Theory and Data Types

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   235

1/5/18   10:41 PM

235

236 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

T his chapter first introduces the concept of a data type and the characteristics of 

the common primitive data types. Then, the designs of enumeration and sub-
range types are discussed. Next, the details of structured data types—specifically 

arrays, associative arrays, records, tuples, lists, and unions—are investigated. This 
section is followed by an in-depth look at pointers and references. The last category of 
types discussed are the optional types.

For each of the various categories of data types, the design issues are stated and 
the design choices made by the designers of some common languages are described. 
These designs are then evaluated.

The next three sections provide a thorough investigation of type checking, strong 

typing, and type equivalence rules. The last section of the chapter briefly introduces 
the fundamentals of the theory of data types.

Implementation methods for data types sometimes have a significant impact on 
their design. Therefore, implementation of the various data types is another important 
part of this chapter, especially arrays.

6.1  Introduction

A data type defines a collection of data values and a set of predefined operations 
on those values. Computer programs produce results by manipulating data. 
An important factor in determining the ease with which they can perform this 
task is how well the data types available in the language being used match the 
objects in the real world of the problem being addressed. Therefore, it is crucial 
that a language supports an appropriate collection of data types and structures.
The contemporary concepts of data typing have evolved over the last 60 years. 
In the earliest languages, all problem space data structures had to be modeled 
with only a few basic language-supported data structures. For example, in pre-90 
Fortrans, linked lists and binary trees were implemented with arrays.

The data structures of COBOL took the first step away from the Fortran I 
model by allowing programmers to specify the accuracy of decimal data values, 
and also by providing a structured data type for records of information. PL/I 
extended the capability of accuracy specification to integer and f loating-point 
types. The designers of PL/I included many data types, with the intent of sup-
porting a large range of applications. A better approach, introduced in ALGOL 
68, is to provide a few basic types and a few f lexible structure-defining opera-
tors that allow a programmer to design a data structure for each need. Clearly, 
this was one of the most important advances in the evolution of data type 
design. User-defined types also provide improved readability through the use 
of meaningful names for types. They allow type checking of the variables of a 
special category of use, which would otherwise not be possible. User-defined 
types also aid modifiability: A programmer can change the type of a category 
of variables in a program by changing a type definition statement only.

Taking  the  concept  of  a  user-defined  type  a  step  further,  we  arrive  at 
abstract  data  types,  which  are  supported  by  most  programming  languages 
designed since the mid-1980s. The fundamental idea of an abstract data type 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   236

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.1 

Introduction 

  237

is that the interface of a type, which is visible to the user, is separated from the 
representation and set of operations on values of that type, which are hidden 
from the user. All of the types provided by a high-level programming language 
are abstract data types. User-defined abstract data types are discussed in detail 
in Chapter 11.

There are a number of uses of the type system of a programming language. 
The most practical of these is error detection. The process and value of type 
checking, which is directed by the type system of the language, are discussed 
in Section 6.12. A second use of a type system is the assistance it provides for 
program modularization. This results from the cross-module type checking 
that ensures the consistency of the interfaces among modules. Another use 
of a type system is documentation. The type declarations in a program doc-
ument information about its data, which provides clues about the program’s  
behavior.

The type system of a programming language defines how a type is associ-
ated with each expression in the language and includes its rules for type equiv-
alence and type compatibility. Certainly, one of the most important parts of 
understanding the semantics of a programming language is understanding its 
type system.

The two most common structured (nonscalar) data types in the imperative 
languages are arrays and records, although the popularity of associative arrays 
has increased significantly in recent years. Lists have been a central part of 
functional programming languages since the first such language appeared in 
1959 (Lisp). Over the last decade, the increasing popularity of functional pro-
gramming has led to lists being added to primarily imperative languages, such 
as Python and C#.

The structured data types are defined with type operators, or constructors, 
which are used to form type expressions. For example, C uses brackets and 
asterisks as type operators to specify arrays and pointers.

It is convenient, both logically and concretely, to think of variables in terms 
of descriptors. A descriptor is the collection of the attributes of a variable. In an 
implementation, a descriptor is an area of memory that stores the attributes of a 
variable. If the attributes are all static, descriptors are required only at compile 
time. These descriptors are built by the compiler, usually as a part of the sym-
bol table, and are used during compilation. For dynamic attributes, however, 
part or all of the descriptor must be maintained during execution. In this case, 
the descriptor is used by the run-time system. In all cases, descriptors are used 
for type checking and building the code for the allocation and deallocation 
operations.

Care  must  be  taken  when  using  the  term  variable.  One  who  uses  only 
traditional imperative languages may think of identifiers as variables, but that 
can lead to confusion when considering data types. Identifiers do not have data 
types in some programming languages. It is wise to remember that identifiers 
are just one of the attributes of a variable.

The word object is often associated with the value of a variable and the space 
it occupies. In this book, however, we reserve object exclusively for instances 
of user-defined and language-defined abstract data types, rather than for the 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   237

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
238 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

values of all program variables of predefined types. Objects are discussed in 
detail in Chapters 11 and 12.

In the following sections, many common data types are discussed. For most, 
design issues particular to the type are stated. For all, one or more example 
designs are described. One design issue is fundamental to all data types: What 
operations are provided for variables of the type, and how are they specified?

6.2  Primitive Data Types

Data types that are not defined in terms of other types are called primitive 
data types. Nearly all programming languages provide a set of primitive data 
types. Some of the primitive types are merely ref lections of the hardware—for 
example, most integer types. Others require only a little nonhardware support 
for their implementation.

To specify the structured types, the primitive data types of a language are 

used, along with one or more type constructors.

6.2.1  Numeric Types

Some early programming languages only had numeric primitive types. Numeric 
types still play a central role among the collections of types supported by con-
temporary languages.

6.2.1.1  Integer

The most common primitive numeric data type is integer. The hardware 
of many computers supports several sizes of integers. These sizes of integers, 
and often a few others, are supported by some programming languages. For 
example, Java includes four signed integer sizes: byte, short, int, and long. 
Some languages, for example, C++ and C#, include unsigned integer types, 
which are types for integer values without signs. Unsigned types are often used 
for binary data.

A signed integer value is represented in a computer by a string of bits, 
with one of the bits (typically the leftmost) representing the sign. Most inte-
ger types are supported directly by the hardware. One example of an integer 
type that is not supported directly by the hardware is the long integer type of 
Python (F# also provides such integers). Values of this type can have unlimited 
length. Long integer values can be specified as literals, as in the following 
example:

243725839182756281923L

Integer arithmetic operations in Python that produce values too large to be 
represented with int type store them as long integer type values.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   238

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.2  Primitive Data Types 

  239

A negative integer could be stored in sign-magnitude notation, in which 
the sign bit is set to indicate negative and the remainder of the bit string rep-
resents the absolute value of the number. Sign-magnitude notation, however, 
does not lend itself to computer arithmetic. Most computers now use a notation 
called twos complement to store negative integers, which is convenient for 
addition and subtraction. In twos-complement notation, the representation of 
a negative integer is formed by taking the logical complement of the positive 
version of the number and adding one. Ones-complement notation is still used 
by some computers. In ones-complement notation, the negative of an integer 
is stored as the logical complement of its absolute value. Ones-complement 
notation has the disadvantage that it has two representations of zero. See any 
book on assembly language programming for details of integer representations.

6.2.1.2  Floating-Point

Floating-point data types model real numbers, but the representations are only 
approximations for many real values. For example, neither of the fundamental 
numbers p or e (the base for the natural logarithms) can be correctly repre-
sented in f loating-point notation. Of course, neither of these numbers can be 
precisely represented in any finite amount of computer memory. On most com-
puters, f loating-point numbers are stored in binary, which exacerbates the 
problem. For example, even the value 0.1 in decimal cannot be represented by 
a finite number of binary digits.1 Another problem with f loating-point types is 
the loss of accuracy through arithmetic operations. For more information on 
the problems of f loating-point notation, see any book on numerical analysis.

Floating-point values are represented as fractions and exponents, a form 
that  is  borrowed  from  scientific  notation.  Older  computers  used  a  variety 
of different representations for f loating-point values. However, most newer 
machines use the IEEE Floating-Point Standard 754 format. Language imple-
mentors use whatever representation is supported by the hardware. Most lan-
guages include two f loating-point types, often called f loat and double. The 
f loat type is the standard size, usually stored in four bytes of memory. The 
double type is provided for situations where larger fractional parts and/or a 
larger range of exponents is needed. Double-precision variables usually occupy 
twice as much storage as f loat variables and provide at least twice the number 
of bits of fraction.

The collection of values that can be represented by a f loating-point type is 
defined in terms of precision and range. Precision is the accuracy of the frac-
tional part of a value, measured as the number of bits. Range is a combination 
of the range of fractions and, more important, the range of exponents.

Figure 6.1 shows the IEEE Floating-Point Standard 754 format for single- 
and double-precision representation (IEEE, 1985). Details of the IEEE formats 
can be found in Tanenbaum (2005).

1.  0.1 in decimal is 0.0001100110011 . . . in binary.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   239

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
240 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

Figure 6.1

IEEE floating-point 
formats: (a) single 
precision, (b) double 
precision

11 bits

Exponent

Sign bit

8 bits

23 bits

Exponent

Fraction

Sign bit

(a)

(b)

52 bits

Fraction

6.2.1.3  Complex

Some  programming  languages  support  a  complex  data  type—for  example, 
Fortran and Python. Complex values are represented as ordered pairs of f loat-
ing-point values. In Python, the imaginary part of a complex literal is specified 
by following it with a j or J—for example,

(7 + 3j)

Languages that support a complex type include operations for arithmetic 

on complex values.

6.2.1.4  Decimal

Most larger computers that are designed to support business systems applica-
tions have hardware support for decimal data types. Decimal data types store a 
fixed number of decimal digits, with the implied decimal point at a fixed posi-
tion in the value. These are the primary data types for business data processing 
and are therefore essential to COBOL. C# and F# also have decimal data types.
Decimal types have the advantage of being able to precisely store dec-
imal values, at least those within a restricted range, which cannot be done 
with  f loating-point. For example, the number 0.1 (in decimal) can be exactly 
represented in a decimal type, but not in a f loating-point type, as is noted in 
Section 6.2.1.2. The disadvantages of decimal types are that the range of val-
ues is restricted because no exponents are allowed, and their representation in 
memory is mildly wasteful, for reasons discussed in the following paragraph.

Decimal types are stored very much like character strings, using binary 
codes for the decimal digits. These representations are called binary coded 
decimal (BCD). In some cases, they are stored one digit per byte, but in others, 
they are packed two digits per byte. Either way, they take more storage than 
binary representations. It takes at least four bits to code a decimal digit. There-
fore, to store a six-digit coded decimal number requires 24 bits of memory. 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   240

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.2  Primitive Data Types 

  241

However, it takes only 20 bits to store the same number in binary.2 The oper-
ations on decimal values are done in hardware on machines that have such 
capabilities; otherwise, they are simulated in software.

6.2.2  Boolean Types

Boolean types are perhaps the simplest of all types. Their range of values 
has only two elements: one for true and one for false. They were introduced 
in ALGOL 60 and have been included in most general-purpose languages 
designed since 1960. One popular exception is C89, in which numeric expres-
sions are used as conditionals. In such expressions, all operands with nonzero 
values are considered true, and zero is considered false. Although C99 and C++ 
have a Boolean type, they also allow numeric expressions to be used as if they 
were Boolean. This is not the case in the subsequent languages, Java and C#.

Boolean types are often used to represent switches or f lags in programs. 
Although other types, such as integers, can be used for these purposes, the use 
of Boolean types is more readable.

A Boolean value could be represented by a single bit, but because a single 
bit of memory cannot be accessed efficiently on many machines, they are often 
stored in the smallest efficiently addressable cell of memory, typically a byte.

6.2.3  Character Types

Character data are stored in computers as numeric codings. Traditionally, the 
most commonly used coding was the 8-bit code ASCII (American Standard 
Code for Information Interchange), which uses the values 0 to 127 to code  
128 different characters. ISO 8859-1 is another 8-bit character code, but it 
allows 256 different characters.

Because of the globalization of business and the need for computers to 
communicate with other computers around the world, the ASCII character set 
became inadequate. In response, in 1991, the Unicode Consortium published 
the UCS-2 standard, a 16-bit character set. This character code is often called 
Unicode. Unicode includes the characters from most of the world’s natural 
languages. For example, Unicode includes the Cyrillic alphabet, as used in 
Serbia, and the Thai digits. The first 128 characters of Unicode are identical 
to those of ASCII. Java was the first widely used language to use the Unicode 
character set. Since then, it has found its way into JavaScript, Python, Perl, 
C#, F#, and Swift.

After 1991, the Unicode Consortium, in cooperation with the Interna-
tional Standards Organization (ISO), developed a 4-byte character code named 
UCS-4, or UTF-32, which is described in the ISO/IEC 10646 Standard, pub-
lished in 2000.

2.  Of course, unless a program needs to maintain a large number of large decimal values, the 

difference is insignificant.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   241

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
242 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

To provide the means of processing codings of single characters, most 
programming languages include a primitive type for them. However, Python 
supports single characters only as character strings of length 1.

6.3  Character String Types

A character string type is one in which the values consist of sequences of 
characters. Character string constants are used to label output, and the input 
and output of all kinds of data are often done in terms of strings. Of course, 
character strings also are an essential type for all programs that do character 
manipulation.

6.3.1  Design Issues

The two most important design issues that are specific to character string types 
are the following:

•  Should strings be a special kind of character array or a primitive type?

•  Should strings have static or dynamic length?

6.3.2  Strings and Their Operations

The most common string operations are assignment, catenation, substring ref-
erence, comparison, and pattern matching.

A substring reference is a reference to a substring of a given string. Sub-
string references are discussed in the more general context of arrays, where the 
substring references are called slices.

In  general,  both  assignment  and  comparison  operations  on  character 
strings are complicated by the possibility of string operands of different lengths. 
For example, what happens when a longer string is assigned to a shorter string, 
or vice versa? Usually, simple and sensible choices are made for these situations, 
although programmers often have trouble remembering them.

In some languages, pattern matching is supported directly in the language. 

In others, it is provided by a function or class library.

If strings are not defined as a primitive type, string data is usually stored 
in arrays of single characters and referenced as such in the language. This is 
the approach taken by C and C++, which use char arrays to store character 
strings. These languages provide a collection of string operations through stan-
dard libraries. Many users of strings and many of the library functions use the 
convention that character strings are terminated with a special character, null, 
which is represented with zero. This is an alternative to maintaining the length 
of string variables. The library operations simply carry out their operations 
until the null character appears in the string being operated on. Library func-
tions that produce strings often supply the null character. The character string 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   242

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.3  Character String Types 

  243

literals that are built by the compiler also have the null character. For example, 
consider the following declaration:

char str[] = "apples";

In this example, str represents an array of char elements, specifically apples0, 
where 0 is the null character.

Some of the most commonly used library functions for character strings in 
C and C++ are strcpy, which moves strings; strcat, which catenates one given 
string onto another; strcmp, which lexicographically compares (by the order of 
their character codes) two given strings; and strlen, which returns the number 
of characters, not counting the null character, in the given string. The parameters 
and return values for most of the string manipulation functions are char pointers 
that point to arrays of char. Parameters can also be string literals.

The string manipulation functions of the C standard library, which are also 
available in C++, are inherently unsafe and have led to numerous programming 
errors. The problem is that the functions in this library that move string data 
do not guard against overf lowing the destination. For example, consider the 
following call to strcpy:

strcpy(dest, src);

If the length of dest is 20 and the length of src is 50, strcpy will write over 
the 30 bytes that follow dest. The point is that strcpy does not know the 
length of dest, so it cannot ensure that the memory following it will not be 
overwritten. The same problem can occur with several of the other functions 
in the C string library. In addition to C-style strings, C++ also supports strings 
through its standard class library, which is also similar to that of Java. Because 
of the insecurities of the C string library, C++ programmers should use the 
string class from the standard library, rather than char arrays and the C 
string library.

In Java, strings are supported by the String class, whose values are con-
stant strings, and the StringBuffer class, whose values are changeable and are 
more like arrays of single characters. These values are specified with methods 
of the StringBuffer class. C# and Ruby include string classes that are similar 
to those of Java.

Python includes strings as a primitive type and has operations for sub-
string reference, catenation, indexing to access individual characters, as well as 
methods for searching and replacement. There is also an operation for charac-
ter membership in a string. So, even though Python’s strings are 
primitive types, for character and substring references, they act 
very much like arrays of characters. However, Python strings are 
immutable, similar to the String class objects of Java.

In F#, strings are a class. Individual characters, which are rep-
resented in Unicode UTF-16, can be accessed, but not changed. 
Strings can be catenated with the + operator. In ML, string is a 

histor y note

SNOBOL 4 was the first widely 
known language to support pat-
tern matching.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   243

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
244 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

primitive immutable type. It uses ^ for its catenation operator and includes 
functions for substring referencing and getting the size of a string.

In Swift, the String class supports its character strings. String objects 
can be either constants or variables. The binary + operator catenates String 
variables. The append method is used to add a Character object to a String 
object. The characters method of String is used to examine individual char-
acters of a String object.

Perl, JavaScript, Ruby, and PHP include built-in pattern-matching oper-
ations. In these languages, the pattern-matching expressions are somewhat 
loosely  based  on  mathematical  regular  expressions.  In  fact,  they  are  often 
called regular expressions. They evolved from the early UNIX line editor, 
ed, to become part of the UNIX shell languages. Eventually, they grew to their 
current complex form. There is at least one complete book on this kind of 
 pattern-matching expressions (Friedl, 2006). In this section, we provide a brief 
look at the style of these expressions through two relatively simple examples.

Consider the following pattern expression:

/[A-Za-z][A-Za-z\d]+/

This pattern matches (or describes) the typical name form in programming 
languages. The brackets enclose character classes. The first character class 
specifies all letters; the second specifies all letters and digits (a digit is specified 
with the abbreviation \d). If only the second character class were included, we 
could not prevent a name from beginning with a digit. The plus operator fol-
lowing the second category specifies that there must be one or more of what is 
in the category. So, the whole pattern matches strings that begin with a letter, 
followed by one or more letters or digits.

Next, consider the following pattern expression:

/\d+\.?\d*|\.\d+/

This pattern matches numeric literals. The \. specifies a literal decimal point.3 
The question mark quantifies what it follows to have zero or one appearance. 
The vertical bar (|) separates two alternatives in the whole pattern. The first 
alternative matches strings of one or more digits, possibly followed by a decimal 
point, followed by zero or more digits; the second alternative matches strings 
that begin with a decimal point, followed by one or more digits.

Pattern-matching capabilities using regular expressions are included in the 

class libraries of C++, Java, Python, C#, and F#.

6.3.3  String Length Options

There are several design choices regarding the length of string values. First, 
the length can be static and set when the string is created. Such a string is 
called a static length string. This is the choice for the strings of Python, the 

3.  The period must be “escaped” with the backslash because period has special meaning in a 

regular expression.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   244

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
 
6.3  Character String Types 

  245

immutable objects of Java’s String class, as well as similar classes in the C++ 
standard class library, Ruby’s built-in String class, and the .NET class library 
available to C# and F#.

The second option is to allow strings to have varying length up to a declared 
and fixed maximum set by the variable’s definition, as exemplified by the strings 
in C and the C-style strings of C++. These are called limited dynamic length 
strings. Such string variables can store any number of characters between zero 
and the maximum. Recall that strings in C use a special character to indicate 
the end of the string’s characters, rather than maintaining the string length.

The third option is to allow strings to have varying length with no max-
imum, as in JavaScript, Perl, and the standard C++ library. These are called 
dynamic length strings. This option requires the overhead of dynamic storage 
allocation and deallocation but provides maximum f lexibility.

6.3.4  Evaluation

String types are important to the writability of a language. Dealing with strings 
as arrays can be more cumbersome than dealing with a primitive string type. 
For example, consider a language that treats strings as arrays of characters and 
does not have a predefined function that does what strcpy in C does. Then, a 
simple assignment of one string to another would require a loop. The addition 
of strings as a primitive type to a language is not costly in terms of either lan-
guage or compiler complexity. Therefore, it is difficult to justify the omission 
of primitive string types in some contemporary languages. Of course, providing 
strings through a standard library is nearly as convenient as having them as a 
primitive type.

String  operations  such  as  simple  pattern  matching  and  catenation  are 
essential  and  should  be  included  for  string  type  values.  Although  dynamic 
length strings are obviously the most f lexible, the overhead of their imple-
mentation must be weighed against that additional f lexibility.

6.3.5 

Implementation of Character String Types

Character string types could be supported directly in hardware; but in most 
cases, software is used to implement string storage, retrieval, and manipulation. 
When character string types are represented as character arrays, the language 
often supplies few operations.

A descriptor for a static character string type, which is required only during 
compilation, has three fields. The first field of every descriptor is the name of 
the type. In the case of static character strings, the second field is the type’s 
length (in characters). The third field is the address of the first character. This 
descriptor  is  shown  in  Figure 6.2.  Limited  dynamic  strings  require  a  run-
time descriptor to store the fixed maximum length, the current length, and 
the address, as shown in Figure 6.3. Dynamic length strings require a simpler 
run-time descriptor because only the current length and the address need to 
be stored. Although we depict descriptors as independent blocks of storage, in 
most cases, they are stored in the symbol table.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   245

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
246 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

Figure 6.2

Compile-time descriptor 
for static strings

Figure 6.3

Run-time descriptor for 
limited dynamic strings

Static string

Length

Address

Limited dynamic string

Maximum length

Current length

Address

The limited dynamic strings of C and C++ do not require run-time descrip-
tors, because the end of a string is marked with the null character. They do 
not need the maximum length, because index values in array references are not 
range checked in these languages.

Static length and limited dynamic length strings require no special dynamic 
storage allocation. In the case of limited dynamic length strings, sufficient stor-
age for the maximum length is allocated when the string variable is bound to 
storage, so only a single allocation process is involved.

Dynamic length strings require more complex storage management. The 
length of a string, and therefore the storage to which it is bound, must grow 
and shrink dynamically.

There are three approaches to supporting the dynamic allocation and deal-
location that is required for dynamic length strings. First, strings can be stored 
in a linked list, so that when a string grows, the newly required cells can come 
from anywhere in the heap. The drawbacks to this method are the extra storage 
occupied by the links in the list representation and the necessary complexity 
of string operations.

The second approach is to store strings as arrays of pointers to individual 
characters allocated in the heap. This method still uses extra memory, but string 
processing can be faster than with the linked-list approach.

The third alternative is to store complete strings in adjacent storage cells. 
The problem with this method arises when a string grows: How can storage 
that is adjacent to the existing cells continue to be allocated for the string vari-
able? Frequently, such storage is not available. Instead, a new area of memory is 
found that can store the complete new string, and the old part is moved to this 
area. Then, the memory cells used for the old string are deallocated. This latter 
approach is the one typically used. The general problem of managing allocation 
and deallocation of variable-size segments is discussed in Section 6.11.7.3.

Although the linked-list method requires more storage, the associated allo-
cation and deallocation processes are simple. However, some string operations 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   246

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.4  Enumeration Types 

  247

are slowed by the required pointer chasing. On the other hand, using adjacent 
memory for complete strings results in faster string operations and requires sig-
nificantly less storage, but the allocation and deallocation processes are slower.

6.4  Enumeration Types

An enumeration type is one in which all of the possible values, which are 
named constants, are provided, or enumerated, in the definition. Enumeration 
types provide a way of defining and grouping collections of named constants, 
which are called enumeration constants. The definition of a typical enumer-
ation type is shown in the following C# example:

enum  days {Mon, Tue, Wed, Thu, Fri, Sat, Sun};

The enumeration constants are typically implicitly assigned the integer 
values, 0, 1, . . . but can be explicitly assigned any integer literal in the type’s 
definition.

6.4.1  Design Issues

The design issues for enumeration types are as follows:

•  Is an enumeration constant allowed to appear in more than one type defi-
nition, and if so, how is the type of an occurrence of that constant in the 
program checked?

•  Are enumeration values coerced to integer?

•  Are any other types coerced to an enumeration type?

All of these design issues are related to type checking. If an enumeration 
variable is coerced to a numeric type, then there is little control over its range 
of legal operations or its range of values. If an int type value is coerced to an 
enumeration type, then an enumeration type variable could be assigned any 
integer value, whether it represented an enumeration constant or not.

6.4.2  Designs

In languages that do not have enumeration types, programmers usually simulate 
them with integer values. For example, suppose we needed to represent colors in a 
C program and C did not have an enumeration type. We might use 0 to represent 
blue, 1 to represent red, and so forth. These values could be defined as follows:

int    red = 0, blue = 1;

Now, in the program, we could use red and blue as if they were of a color type. 
The problem with this approach is that because we have not defined a type for 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   247

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
248 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

our colors, there is no type checking when they are used. For example, it would 
be legal to add the two together, although that would rarely be an intended 
operation. They could also be combined with any other numeric type operand 
using any arithmetic operator, which would also rarely be useful. Furthermore, 
because they are just variables, they could be assigned any integer value, thereby 
destroying the relationship with the colors. This latter problem could be pre-
vented by making them named constants.

C and Pascal were the first widely used languages to include an enumer-
ation data type. C++ includes C’s enumeration types. In C++, we could have 
the following:

enum  colors {red, blue, green, yellow, black};
colors myColor = blue, yourColor = red;

The colors type uses the default internal values for the enumeration con-
stants, 0, 1, . . . , although the constants could have been specifically assigned 
any integer literal (or any constant-valued expression) by the programmer. The 
enumeration values are coerced to int when they are put in integer context. 
This allows their use in any numeric expression. For example, if the current 
value of myColor is blue, then the expression

myColor++

would assign the integer code for green to myColor.

C++ also allows enumeration constants to be assigned to variables of any 
numeric type, though that would likely be an error. However, no other type 
value is coerced to an enumeration type in C++. For example,

myColor = 4;

is illegal in C++. This assignment would be legal if the right side had been cast 
to colors type. This prevents some potential errors.

C++ enumeration constants can appear in only one enumeration type in 

the same referencing environment.

In 2004, an enumeration type was added to Java in Java 5.0. All enumeration 
types in Java are implicitly subclasses of the predefined class Enum. Because enu-
meration types are classes, they can have instance data fields, constructors, and 
methods. Syntactically, Java enumeration type definitions appear like those of 
C++, except that they can include fields, constructors, and methods. The possible 
values of an enumeration are the only possible instances of the class. All enumer-
ation types inherit toString, as well as a few other methods. An array of the 
instances of an enumeration type can be fetched with the static method values. 
The internal numeric value of an enumeration variable can be fetched with the 
ordinal method. No expression of any other type can be assigned to an enumer-
ation variable. Also, an enumeration variable is never coerced to any other type.
C# enumeration types are like those of C++, except that they are never 
coerced to integer. So, operations on enumeration types are restricted to those 
that make sense. Also, the range of values is restricted to that of the particular 
enumeration type.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   248

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.4  Enumeration Types 

  249

In ML, enumeration types are defined as new types with datatype decla-

rations. For example, we could have the following:

datatype weekdays = Monday | Tuesday | Wednesday |
Thursday | Friday

The type of the elements of weekdays is integer.

F#  has  enumeration  types  that  are  similar  to  those  of  ML,  except  the 
reserved word type is used instead of datatype and the first value is preceded 
by an OR operator (|).

Swift has an enumeration type in which the enumeration values are names, 
which represent themselves, rather than having internal integer values. An enu-
meration type is defined in a structure that is similar to a switch structure, as in:

enum fruit {

  case orange
  case apple
  case banana

}

Dot notation is used to reference enumeration values, so in our example, the 
value of apple is referenced as fruit.apple.

Interestingly, none of the relatively recent scripting languages include enu-
meration types. These include Perl, JavaScript, PHP, Python, and Ruby. Even 
Java was a decade old before enumeration types were added.

6.4.3  Evaluation

Enumeration types can provide advantages in both readability and reliabil-
ity. Readability is enhanced very directly: Named values are easily recognized, 
whereas coded values are not.

In the area of reliability, the enumeration types of C#, F#, Java 5.0, and 
Swift  provide  two  advantages:  (1)  No  arithmetic  operations  are  legal  on 
enumeration types; this prevents adding days of the week, for example, and  
(2) second, no enumeration variable can be assigned a value outside its defined 
range.4 If the colors enumeration type has 10 enumeration constants and 
uses 0..9 as its internal values, no number greater than 9 can be assigned to a 
 colors type variable.

Because C treats enumeration variables like integer variables, it does not 

provide either of these two advantages.

C++ is a little better. Numeric values can be assigned to enumeration type 
variables only if they are cast to the type of the assigned variable. Numeric 
values  assigned  to  enumeration  type  variables  are  checked  to  determine 
whether they are in the range of the internal values of the enumeration type. 

4.  In C# and F#, an integer value can be cast to an enumeration type and assigned to the name 
of an enumeration variable. Such values must be tested with Enum.IsDefined method 
before assigning them to the name of an enumeration variable.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   249

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
250 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

Unfortunately, if the user uses a wide range of explicitly assigned values, this 
checking is not effective. For example,

enum  colors {red = 1, blue = 1000, green = 100000}

In this example, a value assigned to a variable of  colors type will only be 
checked to determine whether it is in the range of 1..100000.

6.5  Array Types

An array is a homogeneous aggregate of data elements in which an individual 
element is identified by its position in the aggregate, relative to the first ele-
ment. The individual data elements of an array are of the same type. References 
to individual array elements are specified using subscript expressions. If any of 
the subscript expressions in a reference include variables, then the reference 
will require an additional run-time calculation to determine the address of the 
memory location being referenced.

In many languages, such as C, C++, Java, and C#, all of the elements of 
an array are required to be of the same type. In these languages, pointers and 
references are restricted to point to or reference a single type. So the objects or 
data values being pointed to or referenced are also of a single type. In some other 
languages, such as JavaScript, Python, and Ruby, variables are typeless references 
to objects or data values. In these cases, arrays still consist of elements of a single 
type, but the elements can reference objects or data values of different types. Such 
arrays are still homogeneous, because the array elements are of the same type. In 
Swift, arrays can be typed, that is, they will contain values only of a single type, 
or untyped, which means they can contain values of any type.

C# and Java 5.0 provide generic arrays, that is, arrays whose elements 
are references to objects, through their class libraries. These are discussed in 
Section 6.5.3.

6.5.1  Design Issues

The primary design issues specific to arrays are the following:

•  What types are legal for subscripts?

•  Are subscripting expressions in element references range checked?

•  When are subscript ranges bound?

•  When does array allocation take place?

•  Are ragged or rectangular multidimensioned arrays allowed, or both?
•  Can arrays be initialized when they have their storage allocated?
•  What kinds of slices are allowed, if any?

In the following sections, examples of the design choices made for the 

arrays of the most common programming languages are discussed.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   250

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.5.2  Arrays and Indices

6.5  Array Types 

  251

Specific elements of an array are referenced by means of a two-level syntactic 
mechanism, where the first part is the aggregate name, and the second part is a 
possibly dynamic selector consisting of one or more items known as subscripts 
or indices. If all of the subscripts in a reference are constants, the selector is 
static; otherwise, it is dynamic. The selection operation can be thought of as 
a mapping from the array name and the set of subscript values to 
an element in the aggregate. Indeed, arrays are sometimes called 
finite mappings. Symbolically, this mapping can be shown as

histor y note

The designers of pre-90 For-
trans and PL/I chose parenthe-
ses for array subscripts because 
no other suitable characters 
were available at the time. Card 
punches did not include bracket 
characters.

histor y note

Fortran I limited the number 
of array subscripts to three, 
because at the time of the 
design, execution efficiency was 
a primary concern. Fortran 
I designers had developed a 
very fast method for accessing 
the elements of arrays of up 
to three dimensions, using the 
three index registers of the IBM 
704. Fortran IV was first imple-
mented on an IBM 7094, which 
had seven index registers. This 
allowed Fortran IV’s designers 
to allow arrays with up to seven 
subscripts. Most other contem-
porary languages enforce no 
such limits.

array_name(subscript_value_list) S element

The syntax of array references is fairly universal: The array 
name is followed by the list of subscripts, which is surrounded 
by either parentheses or brackets. In some languages that pro-
vide multidimensioned arrays as arrays of arrays, each subscript 
appears in its own brackets. A problem with using parentheses 
to enclose subscript expressions is that they often are also used 
to enclose the parameters in subprogram calls; this use makes 
references to arrays appear exactly like those calls. For example, 
consider the following Ada assignment statement:

Sum := Sum + B(I);

Because parentheses are used for both subprogram parameters 
and array subscripts in Ada, both program readers and compilers 
are forced to use other information to determine whether B(I) 
in this assignment is a function call or a reference to an array 
element. This results in reduced readability.

The designers of Ada specifically chose parentheses to enclose 
subscripts so there would be uniformity between array references 
and function calls in expressions, in spite of potential readability 
problems. They made this choice in part because both array ele-
ment references and function calls are mappings. Array element 
references map the subscripts to a particular element of the array. 
Function calls map the actual parameters to the function defini-
tion and, eventually, a functional value.

Most languages other than Fortran and Ada use brackets to 

delimit their array indices.

Two distinct types are involved in an array type: the element 
type and the type of the subscripts. The type of the subscripts is often integer.
Early programming languages did not specify that subscript ranges must 
be implicitly checked. Range errors in subscripts are common in programs, so 
requiring range checking is an important factor in the reliability of languages. 
Many contemporary languages also do not specify range checking of subscripts, 
but Java, ML, and C# do.

Subscripting in Perl is a bit unusual in that although the names of all arrays 
begin with at signs (@), because array elements are always scalars and the names 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   251

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
252 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

of scalars always begin with dollar signs ($), references to array elements use 
dollar signs rather than at signs in their names. For example, for the array @
list, the second element is referenced with $list[1].

One can reference an array element in Perl with a negative subscript, in 
which case the subscript value is an offset from the end of the array. For exam-
-2
ple, if the array @list has five elements with the subscripts 0..4, $list
references the element with the subscript 3. A reference to a nonexistent ele-
4
ment in Perl yields undef, but no error is reported.

3

6.5.3  Subscript Bindings and Array Categories

The binding of the subscript type to an array variable is usually static, but the 
subscript value ranges are sometimes dynamically bound.

In some languages, the lower bound of the subscript range is implicit. For 
example, in the C-based languages, the lower bound of all subscript ranges is 
fixed at 0. In some other languages, the lower bounds of the subscript ranges 
must be specified by the programmer.

There  are  four  categories  of  arrays,  based  on  the  binding  to  subscript 
ranges, the binding to storage, and from where the storage is allocated. The 
category names indicate the design choices of these three. In the first three of 
these categories, once the subscript ranges are bound and the storage is allo-
cated, they remain fixed for the lifetime of the variable. Of course, when the 
subscript ranges are fixed, the array cannot change size.

A static array is one in which the subscript ranges are statically bound 
and storage allocation is static (done before run time). The advantage of static 
arrays is efficiency: No dynamic allocation or deallocation is required. The 
disadvantage is that the storage for the array is fixed for the entire execution 
time of the program.

A fixed stack-dynamic array is one in which the subscript ranges are stat-
ically bound, but the allocation is done at declaration elaboration time during 
execution. The advantage of fixed stack-dynamic arrays over static arrays is space 
efficiency. A large array in one subprogram can use the same space as a large array 
in a different subprogram, as long as both subprograms are not active at the same 
time. The same is true if the two arrays are in different blocks that are not active at 
the same time. The disadvantage is the required allocation and deallocation time.
A fixed heap-dynamic array is similar to a fixed stack-dynamic array, in that 
the subscript ranges and the storage binding are both fixed after storage is allocated. 
The differences are that both the subscript ranges and storage bindings are done 
when the user program requests them during execution, and the storage is allo-
cated from the heap, rather than the stack. The advantage of fixed heap-dynamic 
arrays is flexibility—the array’s size always fits the problem. The disadvantage is 
allocation time from the heap, which is longer than allocation time from the stack.
A heap-dynamic array is one in which the binding of subscript ranges 
and storage allocation is dynamic and can change any number of times during 
the array’s lifetime. The advantage of heap-dynamic arrays over the others is 
f lexibility: Arrays can grow and shrink during program execution as the need 
for space changes. The disadvantage is that allocation and deallocation take 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   252

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
 
6.5  Array Types 

  253

longer and may happen many times during execution of the program. Examples 
of the four categories are given in the following paragraphs.

Arrays declared in C and C++ functions that include the static modifier 

are static.

Arrays that are declared in C and C++ functions without the static spec-

ifier are examples of fixed stack-dynamic arrays.

C and C++ also provide fixed heap-dynamic arrays. The standard C library 
functions malloc and free, which are general heap allocation and deallocation 
operations, respectively, can be used for C arrays. C++ uses the operators new and 
delete to manage heap storage. An array is treated as a pointer to a collection 
of storage cells, where the pointer can be indexed, as discussed in Section 6.11.5.
In  Java,  all  non-generic  arrays  are  fixed  heap-dynamic.  Once  created, 
these arrays keep the same subscript ranges and storage. C# also provides fixed 
heap-dynamic arrays.

Objects of the C# List class are generic heap-dynamic arrays. These array 

objects are created without any elements, as in

List<String> stringList =  new  List<String>();

Elements are added to this object with the Add method, as in

stringList.Add("Michael");

Access to elements of these arrays is through subscripting.

Java includes a generic class similar to C#’s List, named ArrayList. It is 
different from C#’s List in that subscripting is not supported—get and set 
methods must be used to access the elements.

A Perl array can be made to grow by using the push (puts one or more new 
elements on the end of the array) and unshift (puts one or more new elements 
on the beginning of the array), or by assigning a value to the array specifying 
a subscript beyond the highest current subscript of the array. An array can be 
made to shrink to no elements by assigning it the empty list, (). The length of 
an array is defined to be the largest subscript plus one.

Like Perl, JavaScript allows arrays to grow with the push and unshift 
methods and shrink by setting them to the empty list. However, negative sub-
scripts are not supported.

JavaScript arrays can be sparse, meaning the subscript values need not be 
contiguous. For example, suppose we have an array named list that has 10 ele-
ments with the subscripts 0..9.5 Consider the following assignment statement:

list[50] = 42;

Now,  list  has  11  elements  and  length  51.  The  elements  with  subscripts 
11..49 are not defined and therefore do not require storage. A reference to a 
nonexistent element in a JavaScript array yields undefined.

5.  The subscript range could just as easily have been 1000 .. 1009.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   253

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
254 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

Arrays in Python and Ruby can be made to grow only through methods 
to add elements or catenate other arrays. Ruby and Perl support negative sub-
scripts, but Python does not. In Python an element or slice of an array can be 
deleted. A reference to a nonexistent element in Python results in a run-time 
error, whereas a similar reference in Ruby yields nil and no error is reported.
Swift dynamic arrays are objects that use integer subscripts, beginning at 
zero, and include several useful methods. The append method adds an element 
to the end of an array. The insert method inserts a new element at any posi-
tion in the array, but results in an error if the insertion is at a subscript beyond 
the current length of the array. Elements can be removed from an array with 
the removeAtIndex method. There are also reverse and count methods.

Although the ML definition does not include arrays, its widely used imple-

mentation, SML/NJ, does.

The only predefined collection type that is part of F# is the array (other 
collection types are provided through the .NET Framework Library). These 
arrays are like those of C#. A foreach statement is included in the language 
for array processing.

6.5.4  Array Initialization

Some languages provide the means to initialize arrays at the time their storage 
is allocated. C, C++, Java, Swift, and C# allow initialization of their arrays. 
Consider the following C declaration:

int  list [] = {4, 5, 7, 83};

The array list is created and initialized with the values 4, 5, 7, and 83. The 
compiler also sets the length of the array. This is meant to be a convenience 
but is not without cost. It effectively removes the possibility that the system 
could detect some kinds of programmer errors, such as mistakenly leaving a 
value out of the list.

As discussed in Section 6.3.2, character strings in C and C++ are imple-
mented as arrays of char. These arrays can be initialized to string constants, as in

char  name [] = "freddie";

The array name will have eight elements, because all strings are terminated with a 
null character (zero), which is implicitly supplied by the system for string constants.
Arrays of strings in C and C++ can also be initialized with string literals. 

For example,

char  *names [] = {"Bob", "Jake", "Darcie"};

This example illustrates the nature of character literals in C and C++. In the 
previous example of a string literal being used to initialize the char array name, 
the literal is taken to be a char array. But in the latter example (names), the 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   254

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.5  Array Types 

  255

literals are taken to be pointers to characters, so the array is an array of pointers 
to characters. For example, names[0] is a pointer to the letter 'B' in the literal 
character array that contains the characters 'B', 'o', 'b', and the null character.
In Java, similar syntax is used to define and initialize an array of references 

to String objects. For example,

String[] names = ["Bob", "Jake", "Darcie"];

6.5.5  Array Operations

An array operation is one that operates on an array as a unit. The most com-
mon array operations are assignment, catenation, comparison for equality and 
inequality, and slices, which are discussed separately in Section 6.5.5.

The  C-based  languages  do  not  provide  any  array  operations,  except 
through the methods of Java, C++, and C#. Perl supports array assignments 
but does not support comparisons.

Python’s arrays are called lists, although they have all the characteristics 
of dynamic arrays. Because the objects can be of any types, these arrays are 
heterogeneous. Python provides array assignment, although it is only a refer-
ence change. Python also has operations for array catenation (+) and element 
membership (in). It includes two different comparison operators: one that 
determines whether the two variables reference the same object (is) and one 
that compares all corresponding objects in the referenced objects, regardless 
of how deeply they are nested, for equality (==).

Like Python, the elements of Ruby’s arrays are references to objects. And 
like Python, when a == operator is used between two arrays, the result is true 
only if the two arrays have the same length and the corresponding elements are 
equal. Ruby’s arrays can be catenated with an Array method.

F# includes many array operators in its Array module. Among these are 

Array.append, Array.copy, and Array.length.

Arrays and their operations are the heart of APL; it is the most powerful 
array-processing language ever devised. Because of its relative obscurity and its 
lack of effect on subsequent languages, however, we present here only a glimpse 
into its array operations.

In APL, the four basic arithmetic operations are defined for vectors (single- 

dimensioned arrays) and matrices, as well as scalar operands. For example,

A + B

is a valid expression, whether A and B are scalar variables, vectors, or matrices.
APL includes a collection of unary operators for vectors and matrices, 

some of which are as follows (where V is a vector and M is a matrix):

fV
fM
uM
ØM
÷M

reverses the elements of V
reverses the columns of M
reverses the rows of M
transposes M (its rows become its columns and vice versa)
inverts M

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   255

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
256 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

APL also includes several special operators that take other operators 
as operands. One of these is the inner product operator, which is specified 
with a period (.). It takes two operands, which are binary operators. For 
example,

+.×

is a new operator that takes two arguments, either vectors or matrices. It first 
multiplies the corresponding elements of two arguments, and then it sums the 
results. For example, if A and B are vectors,

A × B

is the mathematical inner product of A and B (a vector of the products of the 
corresponding elements of A and B). The statement

A +.× B

is the sum of the inner product of A and B. If A and B are matrices, this expres-
sion specifies the matrix multiplication of A and B.

The special operators of APL are actually functional forms, which are 

described in Chapter 15.

6.5.6  Rectangular and Jagged Arrays

A rectangular array is a multidimensioned array in which all of the rows have 
the same number of elements and all of the columns have the same number of 
elements. Rectangular arrays model rectangular tables exactly.

A jagged array is one in which the lengths of the rows need not be the 
same. For example, a jagged matrix may consist of three rows, one with 5 ele-
ments, one with 7 elements, and one with 12 elements. This also applies to the 
columns and higher dimensions. So, if there is a third dimension (layers), each 
layer can have a different number of elements. Jagged arrays are made possible 
when multidimensioned arrays are actually arrays of arrays. For example, a 
matrix would appear as an array of single- dimensioned arrays.

C, C++, and Java support jagged arrays but not rectangular arrays. In those 
languages, a reference to an element of a multidimensioned array uses a sepa-
rate pair of brackets for each dimension. For example,

myArray[3][7]

C# and F# support both rectangular and jagged arrays. For rectangular arrays, 
all subscript expressions in references to elements are placed in a single pair of 
brackets. For example,

myArray[3, 7]

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   256

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.5.7  Slices

6.5  Array Types 

  257

A slice of an array is some substructure of that array. For example, if  A is a 
matrix, then the first row of A is one possible slice, as are the last row and the 
first column. It is important to realize that a slice is not a new data type. Rather, 
it is a mechanism for referencing part of an array as a unit. If arrays cannot be 
manipulated as units in a language, that language has no use for slices.

Consider the following Python declarations:

vector = [2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16]
mat = [[1, 2, 3],[4, 5, 6],[7, 8, 9]]

Recall that the default lower bound for Python arrays is 0. The syntax of a 
Python slice reference is a pair of numeric expressions separated by a colon. 
The first is the first subscript of the slice; the second is the first subscript after 
the last subscript in the slice. Therefore, vector[3:6] is a three-element array 
with the fourth through sixth elements of vector (those elements with the 
subscripts 3, 4, and 5). A row of a matrix is specified by giving just one sub-
script. For example, mat[1] refers to the second row of mat; a part of a row 
can be specified with the same syntax as a part of a single-dimensioned array. 
For example, mat[0][0:2] refers to the first and second element of the first 
row of mat, which is [1, 2].

Python also supports more complex slices of arrays. For example, vec-
tor[0:7:2] references every other element of vector, up to but not including 
the element with the subscript 7, starting with the subscript 0, which is [2, 
6, 10, 14].

Perl supports slices of two forms, a list of specific subscripts or a range of 

subscripts. For example,

@list[1..5] = @list2[3, 5, 7, 9, 13];

Notice that slice references use array names, not scalar names, because slices 
are arrays (not scalars).

Ruby supports slices with the slice method of its Array object, which 
can take three forms of parameters. A single integer expression parameter is 
interpreted as a subscript, in which case slice returns the element with the 
given subscript. If slice is given two integer expression parameters, the first is 
interpreted as a beginning subscript and the second is interpreted as the num-
ber of elements in the slice. For example, suppose list is defined as follows:

list = [2, 4, 6, 8, 10]

list.slice(2, 2) returns [6, 8]. The third parameter form for slice is a 
range, which has the form of an integer expression, two periods, and a second 
integer expression. With a range parameter, slice returns an array of the ele-
ment with the given range of subscripts. For example, list.slice  (1..3) 
returns [4, 6, 8].

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   257

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
258 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

6.5.8  Evaluation

Arrays have been included in virtually all programming languages. The primary 
advances since their introduction in Fortran I have been slices and dynamic 
arrays. As discussed in Section 6.6, the latest advances in arrays have been in 
associative arrays.

6.5.9 

Implementation of Array Types

Implementing arrays requires considerably more compile-time effort than does 
implementing primitive types. The code to allow accessing of array elements 
must be generated at compile time. At run time, this code must be executed to 
produce element addresses. There is no way to precompute the address to be 
accessed by a reference such as

list[k]

A single-dimensioned array is implemented as a list of adjacent memory 
cells. Suppose the array list is defined to have a subscript range lower bound 
of 0. The access function for list is often of the form

address (list[k]) = address (list[0]) + k * element_size

where the first operand of the addition is the constant part of the access func-
tion, and the second is the variable part.

If the element type is statically bound and the array is statically bound to 
storage, then the value of the constant part can be computed before run time. 
However, the addition and multiplication operations must be done at run time.
The generalization of this access function for an arbitrary lower bound is

address (list[k]) = address (list[lower_bound]) +

((k -lower_bound) * element_size)

The compile-time descriptor for single-dimensioned arrays can have the 
form shown in Figure 6.4. The descriptor includes information required to 
construct the access function. If run-time checking of index ranges is not done 
and the attributes are all static, then only the access function is required during 
execution; no descriptor is needed. If run-time checking of index ranges is 

Figure 6.4

Compile-time descriptor 
for single-dimensioned 
arrays

Array

Element type

Index type

Index lower bound

Index upper bound

Address

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   258

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.5  Array Types 

  259

done, then those index ranges may need to be stored in a run-time descriptor. If 
the subscript ranges of a particular array type are static, then the ranges may be 
incorporated into the code that does the checking, thus eliminating the need for 
the run-time descriptor. If any of the descriptor entries are dynamically bound, 
then those parts of the descriptor must be maintained at run time.

True multidimensional arrays, that is, those that are not arrays of arrays, 
are more complex to implement than single-dimensioned arrays, although the 
extension to more dimensions is straightforward. Hardware memory is linear—
just a simple sequence of bytes. So values of data types that have two or more 
dimensions must be mapped onto the single-dimensioned memory. There are 
two ways in which multidimensional arrays can be mapped to one dimension: 
row major order and column major order (not used in any widely used lan-
guage). In row major order, the elements of the array that have as their first 
subscript the lower bound value of that subscript are stored first, followed by 
the elements of the second value of the first subscript, and so forth. If the array 
is a matrix, it is stored by rows. For example, if the matrix had the values

3 4 7
6 2 5
1 3 8

it would be stored in row major order as

3, 4, 7, 6, 2, 5, 1, 3, 8

The access function for a multidimensional array is the mapping of its 
base address and a set of index values to the address in memory of the element 
specified by the index values. The access function for two-dimensional arrays 
stored in row major order can be developed as follows. In general, the address 
of an element is the base address of the structure plus the element size times 
the number of elements that precede it in the structure. For a matrix in row 
major order, the number of elements that precede an element is the number of 
rows above the element times the size of a row, plus the number of elements to 
the left of the element in its row. This is illustrated in Figure 6.5, in which we 
assume that subscript lower bounds are all zero.

Figure 6.5

The location of the 
[i,j] element in a 
matrix

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   259

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
260 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

To get an actual address value, the number of elements that precede the 
desired element must be multiplied by the element size. Now, the access func-
tion can be written as

location(a[i,j]) = address of a[0, 0]

     + ((((number of rows above the ith row) * (size of a row))
     + (number of elements left of the jth column)) *

 element size)

Because the number of rows above the ith row is i and the number of elements 
to the left of the jth column is j, we have

location(a[i, j]) = address of a[0, 0] + (((i * n)  + j) *

 element_size)

where n is the number of elements per row. The first term is the constant part 
and the last is the variable part.

The generalization to arbitrary lower bounds results in the following access 

function:

location(a[i, j]) = address of a[row_lb, col_lb]

  = (((i - row_lb) * n) + (j - col_lb)) * element_size

where row_lb is the lower bound of the rows and col_lb is the lower bound of 
the columns. This can be rearranged to the form

location(a[i, j]) = address of a[row_lb, col_lb]

  - (((row_lb * n) + col_lb) * element_size)
  + (((i * n) + j) * element_size)

where the first two terms are the constant part and the last is the variable part. 
This can be generalized rather easily to an arbitrary number of dimensions.

For each dimension of an array, one add and one multiply instruction are 
required for the access function. Therefore, accesses to elements of arrays with 
several subscripts are costly. The compile-time descriptor for a multidimen-
sional array is shown in Figure 6.6.

Figure 6.6

A compile-time 
 descriptor for a 
 multidimensional array

0

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   260

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.6  Associative Arrays

6.6  Associative Arrays 

  261

An  associative  array  is  an  unordered  collection  of  data  elements  that  are 
indexed by an equal number of values called keys. In the case of non- associative 
arrays, the indices never need to be stored (because of their regularity). In an 
associative array, however, the user-defined keys must be stored in the struc-
ture. So each element of an associative array is in fact a pair of entities, a key 
and a value. We use Perl’s design of associative arrays to illustrate this data 
structure. Associative arrays are also supported directly by Python, Ruby, and 
Swift and by the standard class libraries of Java, C++, C#, and F#.

The only design issue that is specific for associative arrays is the form of 

references to their elements.

6.6.1  Structure and Operations

In Perl, associative arrays are called hashes, because in the implementation 
their elements are stored and retrieved with hash functions. The namespace 
for Perl hashes is distinct: Every hash variable name must begin with a percent 
sign (%). Each hash element consists of two parts: a key, which is a string, and 
a value, which is a scalar (number, string, or reference). Hashes can be set to 
literal values with the assignment statement, as in

%salaries = ("Gary" => 75000, "Perry" => 57000,
             "Mary" => 55750, "Cedric" => 47850);

Individual element values are referenced using notation that is similar to 
that used for Perl arrays. The key value is placed in braces and the hash name is 
replaced by a scalar variable name that is the same except for the first character. 
Although hashes are not scalars, the value parts of hash elements are scalars, so 
references to hash element values use scalar names. Recall that scalar variable 
names begin with dollar signs ($). So, an assignment of 58850 to the element 
of %salaries with the key "Perry" would appear as follows:

$salaries{"Perry"} = 58850;

A new element is added using the same assignment statement form. An element 
can be removed from the hash with the delete operator, as in the following:

delete $salaries{"Gary"};

The entire hash can be emptied by assigning the empty literal to it, as in the 
following:

@salaries = ();

The size of a Perl hash is dynamic: It grows when an element is added and 
shrinks when an element is deleted, and also when it is emptied by assignment 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   261

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
262 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

of the empty literal. The exists operator returns true or false, depending on 
whether its operand key is an element in the hash. For example,

if (exists $salaries{"Shelly"}) . . .

The keys operator, when applied to a hash, returns an array of the keys of 
the hash. The values operator does the same for the values of the hash. The 
each operator iterates over the element pairs of a hash.

Python’s associative arrays, which are called dictionaries, are similar to 
those of Perl, except the values are all references to objects. The associative 
arrays supported by Ruby are similar to those of Python, except that the keys 
can be any object,6 rather than just strings. There is a progression from Perl’s 
hashes, in which the keys must be strings, to PHP’s arrays, in which the keys 
can be integers or strings, to Ruby’s hashes, in which any type object can be 
a key.

PHP’s arrays are both normal arrays and associative arrays. They can be 
treated as either. The language provides functions that allow both indexed and 
hashed access to elements. An array can have elements that are created with 
simple numeric indices and elements that are created with string hash keys.

Swift’s associative arrays are called dictionaries. The keys can be of one spe-
cific type, but the values can be of mixed types, in which case they are objects.
An associative array is much better than an array if searches of the ele-
ments are required, because the implicit hashing operation used to access 
elements is very efficient. Furthermore, associative arrays are ideal when the 
data to be stored is paired, as with employee names and their salaries. On the 
other hand, if every element of a list must be processed, it is more efficient 
to use an array.

6.6.2 

Implementing Associative Arrays

The implementation of Perl’s associative arrays is optimized for fast lookups, 
but it also provides relatively fast reorganization when array growth requires 
it. A 32-bit hash value is computed for each entry and is stored with the entry, 
although an associative array initially uses only a small part of the hash value. 
When an associative array must be expanded beyond its initial size, the hash 
function need not be changed; rather, more bits of the hash value are used. 
Only  half  of  the  entries  must  be  moved  when  this  happens.  So,  although 
expansion of an associative array is not free, it is not as costly as might be 
expected.

6.  Objects that change do not make good keys, because the changes could change the hash 

function value. Therefore, arrays and hashes are never used as keys.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   262

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
 
6.7  Record Types 

  263

The elements in PHP’s arrays are placed in memory through a hash func-
tion. However, all elements are linked together in the order in which they were 
created. The links are used to support iterative access to elements through the 
current and next functions.

6.7  Record Types

A record is an aggregate of data elements in which the individual elements 
are identified by names and accessed through offsets from the beginning of 
the structure.

There is frequently a need in programs to model a collection of data in 
which the individual elements are not of the same type or size. For example, 
information about a college student might include name, student number, grade 
point average, and so forth. A data type for such a collection might use a char-
acter string for the name, an integer for the student number, a  f loating-point 
for the grade point average, and so forth. Records are designed for this kind 
of need.

It may appear that records and heterogeneous arrays are the same, but that 
is not the case. The elements of a heterogeneous array are all references to 
data objects that reside in scattered locations, often on the heap. The elements 
of a record are of potentially different sizes and reside in adjacent memory 
locations.

Records have been part of all of the most popular programming languages, 
except pre-90 versions of Fortran, since the early 1960s, when they were intro-
duced by COBOL. In some languages that support object-oriented program-
ming, data classes serve as records.

In C, C++, C#, and Swift, records are supported with the struct data 
type. In C++, structures are a minor variation on classes. In C#, structs also 
are related to classes, but are quite different from them. C# structs are stack- 
allocated value types, as opposed to class objects, which are heap-allocated 
reference types. Structs in C++ and C# are normally used as encapsulation 
structures, rather than data structures. They are further discussed in this capac-
ity in Chapter 11. Structs are also included in ML and F#.

In Python and Ruby, records can be implemented as hashes, which them-

selves can be elements of arrays.

The  following  sections  describe  how  records  are  declared  or  defined, 
how references to fields within records are made, and the common record 
operations.

The following design issues are specific to records:

•  What is the syntactic form of references to fields?
•  Are elliptical references allowed?

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   263

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
264 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

6.7.1  Definitions of Records

The fundamental difference between a record and an array is that record 
elements, or fields, are not referenced by indices. Instead, the fields are 
named with identifiers, and references to the fields are made using these 
identifiers. Another difference between arrays and records is that records 
in some languages are allowed to include unions, which are discussed in 
Section 6.10.

The COBOL form of a record declaration, which is part of the data divi-

sion of a COBOL program, is illustrated in the following example:

01  EMPLOYEE-RECORD.
    02  EMPLOYEE-NAME.
        05  FIRST   PICTURE IS X(20).
        05  Middle  PICTURE IS X(10).
        05  LAST    PICTURE IS X(20).
    02  HOURLY-RATE PICTURE IS 99V99.

The EMPLOYEE-RECORD record consists of the EMPLOYEE-NAME record and the 
HOURLY-RATE field. The numerals 01, 02, and 05 that begin the lines of the 
record declaration are level numbers, which indicate by their relative values 
the hierarchical structure of the record. Any line that is followed by a line 
with a higher-level number is itself a record. The PICTURE clauses show the 
formats of the field storage locations, with X(20) specifying 20 alphanumeric 
characters and 99V99 specifying four decimal digits with the decimal point in 
the middle.

In Java, records can be defined as data classes, with nested records defined 

as nested classes. Data members of such classes serve as the record fields.

6.7.2  References to Record Fields

References to the individual fields of records are syntactically specified by sev-
eral different methods, two of which name the desired field and its enclosing 
records. COBOL field references have the form

field_name OF record_name_1 OF . . . OF record_name_n

where the first record named is the smallest or innermost record that contains 
the field. The next record name in the sequence is that of the record that con-
tains the previous record, and so forth. For example, the Middle field in the 
COBOL record example above can be referenced with

Middle OF EMPLOYEE-NAME OF EMPLOYEE-RECORD

Most of the other languages use dot notation for field references, where 
the components of the reference are connected with periods. Names in dot 
notation have the opposite order of COBOL references: They use the name 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   264

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.7  Record Types 

  265

of the largest enclosing record first and the field name last. For example, if 
Middle is a field in the Employee_Name record which is embedded in the 
Employee_Record record, it would be referenced with the following:

Employee_Record.Employee_Name.Middle

A fully qualified reference to a record field is one in which all intermediate 
record names, from the largest enclosing record to the specific field, are named 
in the reference. In the COBOL example above the field reference is fully qual-
ified. As an alternative to fully qualified references, COBOL allows  elliptical 
references to record fields. In an elliptical reference, the field is named, but 
any or all of the enclosing record names can be omitted, as long as the resulting 
reference is unambiguous in the referencing environment. For example, FIRST, 
FIRST OF EMPLOYEE-NAME, and FIRST OF EMPLOYEE-RECORD are elliptical 
references to the employee’s first name in the COBOL record declared above. 
Although elliptical references are a programmer convenience, they require 
a compiler to have elaborate data structures and procedures in order to cor-
rectly identify the referenced field. They are also somewhat detrimental to 
readability.

6.7.3  Evaluation

Records are frequently valuable data types in programming languages. The 
design of record types is straightforward, and their use is safe.

Records and arrays are closely related structural forms, and therefore it 
is interesting to compare them. Arrays are used when all the data values have 
the same type and/or are processed in the same way. This processing is easily 
done when there is a systematic way of sequencing through the structure. Such 
processing is well supported by using dynamic subscripting as the addressing 
method.

Records are used when the collection of data values is heterogeneous and 
the different fields are not processed in the same way. Also, the fields of a record 
often need not be processed in a particular order. Field names are like literal, or 
constant, subscripts. Because they are static, they provide very efficient access 
to the fields. Dynamic subscripts could be used to access record fields, but it 
would disallow type checking and would also be slower.

Records and arrays represent thoughtful and efficient methods of fulfilling 

two separate but related applications of data structures.

6.7.4 

Implementation of Record Types

The fields of records are stored in adjacent memory locations. But because the 
sizes of the fields are not necessarily the same, the access method used for arrays 
is not used for records. Instead, the offset address, relative to the beginning of 
the record, is associated with each field. Field accesses are all handled using 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   265

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
266 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

Figure 6.7

A compile-time 
 descriptor for a record

Field 1

Field n

Record

Name

Type

Offset

Name

Type

Offset

Address

these offsets. The compile-time descriptor for a record has the general form 
shown in Figure 6.7. Run-time descriptors for records are unnecessary.

6.8  Tuple Types

A tuple is a data type that is similar to a record, except that the elements are 
not named.

Python includes an immutable tuple type. If a tuple needs to be changed, it can 
be converted to an array with the list function. After the change, it can be con-
verted back to a tuple with the tuple function. One use of tuples is when an array 
must be write protected, such as when it is sent as a parameter to an external func-
tion and the user does not want the function to be able to modify the parameter.

Python’s  tuples  are  closely  related  to  its  lists,  except  that  tuples  are 
immutable. A tuple is created by assigning a tuple literal, as in the following 
example:

myTuple = (3, 5.8, 'apple')

Notice that the elements of a tuple need not be of the same type.

The elements of a tuple can be referenced with indexing in brackets, as in 

the following:

myTuple[1]

This references the first element of the tuple, because tuple indexing begins at 1.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   266

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.8  Tuple Types 

  267

Tuples can be catenated with the plus (+) operator. They can be deleted 
with the  del statement. There are also other operators and functions that 
operate on tuples.

ML includes a tuple data type. An ML tuple must have at least two ele-
ments, whereas Python’s tuples can be empty or contain one element. As in 
Python, an ML tuple can include elements of mixed types. The following state-
ment creates a tuple:

val myTuple = (3, 5.8, 'apple');

The syntax of a tuple element access is as follows:

#1(myTuple);

This references the first element of the tuple.

A new tuple type can be defined in ML with a type declaration, such as 

the following:

type intReal = int * real;

Values of this type consist of an integer and a real. The asterisk can be mislead-
ing. It is used to separate the tuple components, indicating a type product, and 
has nothing to do with arithmetic.

F# also has tuples. A tuple is created by assigning a tuple value, which is 
a list of expressions separated by commas and delimited by parentheses, to a 
name in a let statement. If a tuple has two elements, they can be referenced 
with the functions fst and snd, respectively. The elements of a tuple with 
more than two elements are often referenced with a tuple pattern on the left 
side of a let statement. A tuple pattern is simply a sequence of names, one for 
each element of the tuple, with or without the delimiting parentheses. When a 
tuple pattern is the left side of a let construct, it is a multiple assignment. For 
example, consider the following let constructs:

let tup = (3, 5, 7);;
let a, b, c  = tup;;

This assigns 3 to a, 5 to b, and 7 to c.

Tuples  are  used  in  Python,  ML,  and  F#  to  allow  functions  to  
return  multiple  values.  In  Swift,  tuples  are  passed  by  value,  so  they  are 
sometimes used to pass data to a function when the function is not to change 
that data.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   267

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
268 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

6.9  List Types

Lists were first supported in the first functional programming language, Lisp. 
They have always been part of the functional languages, but in recent years 
they have found their way into some imperative languages.

Lists in Scheme and Common Lisp are delimited by parentheses and the 

elements are not separated by any punctuation. For example,

(A B C D)

Nested lists have the same form, so we could have

(A (B C) D)

In this list, (B C) is a list nested inside the outer list.

Data and code have the same syntactic form in Lisp and its descendants. 
If the list (A  B  C) is interpreted as code, it is a call to the function A with 
parameters B and C.

The fundamental list operations in Scheme are two functions that take lists 
apart and two that build lists. The CAR function returns the first element of its 
list parameter. For example, consider the following example:

(CAR '(A B C))

The quote before the parameter list is to prevent the interpreter from consid-
ering the list a call to the A function with the parameters B and C, in which case 
it would interpret it. This call to CAR returns A.

The CDR function returns its parameter list minus its first element. For 

example, consider the following example:

(CDR '(A B C))

This function call returns the list (B C).

Common Lisp also has the functions FIRST (same as CAR), SECOND, . . . , 
TENTH, which return the element of their list parameters that is specified by 
their names.

In Scheme and Common Lisp, new lists are constructed with the CONS and 
LIST functions. The function CONS takes two parameters and returns a new 
list with its first parameter as the first element and its second parameter as the 
remainder of that list. For example, consider the following:

(CONS 'A '(B C))

This call returns the new list (A B C).

The LIST function takes any number of parameters and returns a new list with 

the parameters as its elements. For example, consider the following call to LIST:

(LIST 'A 'B '(C D))

This call returns the new list (A B (C D)).

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   268

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.9  List Types 

  269

ML has lists and list operations, although their appearance is not like those 
of Scheme. Lists are specified in square brackets, with the elements separated 
by commas, as in the following list of integers:

[5, 7, 9]

[] is the empty list, which could also be specified with nil.

The Scheme CONS function is implemented as a binary infix operator in 

ML, represented as ::. For example,

3 :: [5, 7, 9]

returns the following new list: [3, 5, 7, 9].

The elements of a list must be of the same type, so the following list would 

be illegal:

[5, 7.3, 9]

ML has functions that correspond to Scheme’s CAR and CDR, named hd 

(head) and tl (tail). For example,

hd [5, 7, 9] is 5
tl [5, 7, 9] is [7, 9]

Lists and list operations in Scheme and ML are more fully discussed in 

Chapter 15.

Lists in F# are  related to those of  ML with a  few notable differences. 
 Elements of a list in F# are separated by semicolons, rather than the commas 
of ML. The operations hd and tl are the same, but they are called as methods 
of the List class, as in List.hd [1; 3; 5; 7], which returns 1. The CONS 
operation of F# is specified as two colons, as in ML.

Python  includes  a  list  data  type,  which  also  serves  as  Python’s  arrays. 
Unlike the lists of Scheme, Common Lisp, ML, and F#, the lists of Python are 
mutable. They can contain any data value or object. A Python list is created 
with an assignment of a list value to a name. A list value is a sequence of expres-
sions that are separated by commas and delimited with brackets. For example, 
consider the following statement:

myList = [3, 5.8, "grape"]

The elements of a list are referenced with subscripts in brackets, as in the 

following example:

x = myList[1]

This statement assigns 5.8 to x. The elements of a list are indexed starting 
at zero. List elements also can be updated by assignment. A list element can be 
deleted with del, as in the following statement:

del myList[1]

This statement removes the second element of myList.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   269

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
270 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

Python includes a powerful mechanism for creating arrays called list com-
prehensions. A list comprehension is an idea derived from set notation. It first 
appeared in the functional programming language Haskell (see Chapter 15). 
The mechanics of a list comprehension is that a function is applied to each of 
the elements of a given array and a new array is constructed from the results. 
The syntax of a Python list comprehension is as follows:

[expression for iterate_var in array if condition]

Consider the following example:

[x * x  for  x  in range(12)  if  x % 3 == 0]

The range function creates the array [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 
10, 11, 12]. The conditional filters out all numbers in the array that are not 
evenly divisible by 3. Then, the expression squares the remaining numbers. 
The results of the squaring are collected in an array, which is returned. This 
list comprehension returns the following array:

[0, 9, 36, 81]

Slices of lists are also supported in Python.
Haskell’s list comprehensions have the following form:

[body | qualifiers]

For example, consider the following definition of a list:

[n * n | n <- [1..10]]

This defines a list of the squares of the numbers from 1 to 10.

F# includes list comprehensions, which in that language can also be used 

to create arrays. For example, consider the following statement:

let myArray = [|for i in 1 .. 5 -> (i * i) |];;

This statement creates the array [1; 4; 9; 16; 25] and names it myArray.
Recall from Section 6.5 that C# and Java support generic heap-dynamic 
collection classes,  List and ArrayList, respectively. These structures are 
actually lists.

6.10  Union Types

A union is a type whose variables may store different type values at different 
times during program execution. As an example of the need for a union type, 
consider a table of constants for a compiler, which is used to store the constants 
found in a program being compiled. One field of each table entry is for the 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   270

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.10  Union Types 

  271

value of the constant. Suppose that for a particular language being compiled, 
the types of constants were integer, f loating-point, and Boolean. In terms of 
table management, it would be convenient if the same location, a table field, 
could store a value of any of these three types. Then all constant values could 
be addressed in the same way. The type of such a location is, in a sense, the 
union of the three value types it can store.

6.10.1  Design Issues

The problem of type checking union types, which is discussed in Section 6.12, 
is their major design issue.

6.10.2  Discriminated Versus Free Unions

C and C++ provide union constructs in which there is no language support 
for type checking. In C and C++, the union construct is used to specify union 
structures. The unions in these languages are called free unions, because pro-
grammers are allowed complete freedom from type checking in their use. For 
example, consider the following C union:

union flexType {
 int intEl;
 float  floatEl;
};
union flexType el1;
float x;
. . .
el1.intEl = 27;
x = el1.floatEl;

This last assignment is not type checked, because the system cannot determine 
the current type of the current value of el1, so it assigns the bit string repre-
sentation of 27 to the float variable x, which, of course, is nonsense.

Type checking of unions requires that each union construct include a type 
indicator. Such an indicator is called a tag, or discriminant, and a union with 
a discriminant is called a discriminated union. The first language to provide 
discriminated unions was ALGOL 68. They are now supported by ML, Has-
kell, and F#.

6.10.3  Unions in F#

A union is declared in F# with a type statement using OR operators (|) to 
define the components. For example, we could have the following:

type intReal =
   | IntValue of int
   | RealValue of float;;

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   271

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
272 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

In this example, intReal is the union type. IntValue and RealValue are 
constructors. Values of type intReal can be created using the constructors as 
if they were a function, as in the following examples:7

let ir1 = IntValue 17;;
let ir2 = RealValue 3.4;;

Accessing the value of a union is done with a pattern-matching structure. 
Pattern matching in F# is specified with the match reserved word. The general 
form of the construct is as follows:

match pattern with
  | expression_list1 - 7 expression1
  | . . .
  | expression_listn - 7 expressionn

The pattern can be any data type. The expression list can include wild 
card characters (_) or be solely a wild card character. For example, consider the 
following match construct:

let a = 7;;
let b = "grape";;
let x = match (a, b) with
     | 4, "apple" -> apple
     | _, "grape" -> grape
     | _ -> fruit;;

To display the type of the intReal union, the following function could 

be used:

let printType value =
    match value with
        | IntValue value -> printfn "It is an integer"
        | RealValue value -> printfn "It is a float";;

The following lines show calls to this function and the output:

printType ir1;;
It is an integer
printType ir2;;
It is a float

7.  The let statement is used to assign values to names and to create a static scope; the double 
semicolons are used to terminate statements when the F# interactive interpreter is being 
used.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   272

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
 
6.11  Pointer and Reference Types 

  273

6.10.4  Evaluation

Unions are potentially unsafe constructs in some languages. They are one of 
the reasons why C and C++ are not strongly typed: These languages do not 
allow type checking of references to their unions. On the other hand, unions 
can be safely used, as in their design in ML, Haskell, and F#.

Neither Java nor C# includes unions, which may be ref lective of the grow-

ing concern for safety in some programming languages.

6.10.5 

Implementation of Union Types

Unions are implemented by simply using the same address for every possible 
variant. Sufficient storage for the largest variant is allocated.

6.11  Pointer and Reference Types

A pointer type is one in which the variables have a range of values that consists 
of memory addresses and a special value, nil. The value nil is not a valid address 
and is used to indicate that a pointer cannot currently be used to reference a 
memory cell.

Pointers are designed for two distinct kinds of uses. First, pointers provide 
some of the power of indirect addressing, which is frequently used in assembly 
language programming. Second, pointers provide a way to manage dynamic 
storage. A pointer can be used to access a location in an area where storage is 
dynamically allocated called a heap.

Variables that are dynamically allocated from the heap are called heap- 
dynamic variables. They often do not have identifiers associated with them 
and thus can be referenced only by pointer or reference type variables.  Variables 
without names are called anonymous variables. It is in this latter application 
area of pointers that the most important design issues arise.

Pointers, unlike arrays and records, are not structured types, although they 
are defined using a type operator (* in C and C++). Furthermore, they are also 
different from scalar variables because they are used to reference some other 
variable, rather than being used to store data. These two categories of variables 
are called reference types and value types, respectively.

Both kinds of uses of pointers add writability to a language. For example, 
suppose it is necessary to implement a dynamic structure like a binary tree in a 
language that does not have pointers or dynamic storage. This would require 
the programmer to provide and maintain a pool of available tree nodes, which 
would probably be implemented in parallel arrays. Also, it would be necessary 
for the programmer to guess the maximum number of required nodes. This is 
clearly an awkward and error-prone way to deal with binary trees.

Reference  variables,  which  are  discussed  in  Section 6.11.6,  are  closely 

related to pointers.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   273

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
274 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

6.11.1  Design Issues

The primary design issues particular to pointers are the following:

•  What are the scope and lifetime of a pointer variable?

•  What  is  the  lifetime  of  a  heap-dynamic  variable  (the  value  a  pointer 

references)?

•  Are pointers restricted as to the type of value to which they can point?

•  Are pointers used for dynamic storage management, indirect addressing, 

or both?

•  Should the language support pointer types, reference types, or both?

6.11.2  Pointer Operations

Languages that provide a pointer type usually include two fundamental pointer 
operations: assignment and dereferencing. The first operation sets a pointer 
variable’s value to some useful address. If pointer variables are used only to 
manage dynamic storage, then the allocation mechanism, whether by operator 
or built-in subprogram, serves to initialize the pointer variable. If pointers are 
used for indirect addressing to variables that are not heap dynamic, then there 
must be an explicit operator or built-in subprogram for fetching the address of 
a variable, which can then be assigned to the pointer variable.

An occurrence of a pointer variable in an expression can be interpreted in 
two distinct ways. First, it could be interpreted as a reference to the contents 
of the memory cell to which it is bound, which in the case of a pointer is an 
address. This is exactly how a nonpointer variable in an expression would be 
interpreted, although in that case its value likely would not be an address. 
However, the pointer also could be interpreted as a reference to the value in 
the memory cell pointed to by the memory cell to which the pointer variable 
is bound. In this case, the pointer is interpreted as an indirect reference. The 
former case is a normal pointer reference; the latter is the result of derefer-
encing the pointer. Dereferencing, which takes a reference through one level 
of indirection, is the second fundamental pointer operation.

Dereferencing of pointers can be either explicit or implicit. In many con-
temporary languages, it occurs only when explicitly specified. In C++, it is 
explicitly specified with the asterisk (*) as a prefix unary operator. Consider the 
following example of dereferencing: If ptr is a pointer variable with the value 
7080 and the cell whose address is 7080 has the value 206, then the assignment

j = *ptr

sets j to 206. This process is shown in Figure 6.8.

When pointers point to records, the syntax of the references to the fields 
of these records varies among languages. In C and C++, there are two ways a 
pointer to a record can be used to reference a field in that record. If a pointer 
variable p points to a record with a field named age, (*p).age can be used to 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   274

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
Figure 6.8

The assignment 
 operation j = *ptr

7080

206

An anonymous
dynamic variable

6.11  Pointer and Reference Types 

  275

ptr

7080

j

refer to that field. The operator ->, when used between a pointer to a struct and 
a field of that struct, combines dereferencing and field reference. For example, 
the expression p -> age is equivalent to (*p).age.

Languages  that  provide  pointers  for  the  management  of  a  heap  must 
include an explicit allocation operation. Allocation is sometimes specified with 
a subprogram, such as malloc in C. In languages that support object-oriented 
programming, allocation of heap objects is often specified with the new oper-
ator. C++, which does not provide implicit deallocation, uses delete as its 
deallocation operator.

6.11.3  Pointer Problems

The first high-level programming language to include pointer variables was 
PL/I, in which pointers could be used to refer to both heap-dynamic variables 
and other program variables. The pointers of PL/I were highly f lexible, but 
their use could lead to several kinds of programming errors. Some of the prob-
lems of PL/I pointers are also present in the pointers of subsequent languages. 
Some recent languages, such as Java, have replaced pointers completely with 
reference types, which, along with implicit deallocation, minimize the primary 
problems with pointers. A reference type is really only a pointer with restricted 
operations.

6.11.3.1  Dangling Pointers

A dangling pointer, or dangling reference, is a pointer that contains the 
address of a heap-dynamic variable that has been deallocated. Dangling point-
ers are dangerous for several reasons. First, the location being pointed to may 
have been reallocated to some new heap-dynamic variable. If the new variable 
is not the same type as the old one, type checks of uses of the dangling pointer 
are invalid. Even if the new dynamic variable is the same type, its new value 
will have no relationship to the old pointer’s dereferenced value. Furthermore, 
if the dangling pointer is used to change the heap-dynamic variable, the value 
of the new heap-dynamic variable will be destroyed. Finally, it is possible that 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   275

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
276 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

the location now is being temporarily used by the storage management system, 
possibly as a pointer in a chain of available blocks of storage, thereby allowing 
a change to the location to cause the storage manager to fail.

The following sequence of operations creates a dangling pointer in many 

languages:

1.  A new heap-dynamic variable is created and pointer p1 is set to point 

to it.

2.  Pointer p2 is assigned p1’s value.

3.  The heap-dynamic variable pointed to by p1 is explicitly deallocated 
(possibly setting p1 to nil), but p2 is not changed by the operation. p2 
is now a dangling pointer. If the deallocation operation did not change 
p1, both p1 and p2 would be dangling. (Of course, this is a problem of 
aliasing—p1 and p2 are aliases.)

For example, in C++ we could have the following:

int * arrayPtr1;
int * arrayPtr2 = new int[100];
arrayPtr1 = arrayPtr2;
delete [] arrayPtr2;
// Now, arrayPtr1 is dangling, because the heap storage
// to which it was pointing has been deallocated.

In C++, both arrayPtr1 and arrayPtr2 are now dangling pointers, because 
the C++ delete operator has no effect on the value of its operand pointer. In 
C++, it is common (and safe) to follow a delete operator with an assignment 
of zero, which represents null, to the pointer whose pointed-to value has been 
deallocated.

histor y note

Pascal included an explicit 
deallocate operator: dispose. 
Because of the problem of 
dangling pointers caused by 
dispose, some Pascal implemen-
tations simply ignored dispose 
when it appeared in a program. 
Although this effectively pre-
vents dangling pointers, it also 
disallows the reuse of heap 
storage that the program no 
longer needs. Recall that Pas-
cal initially was designed as a 
teaching language, rather than 
as an industrial tool.

Notice that the explicit deallocation of dynamic variables is 

the cause of dangling pointers.

6.11.3.2  Lost Heap-Dynamic Variables

A  lost  heap-dynamic  variable  is  an  allocated  heap-dynamic 
variable that is no longer accessible to the user program. Such 
variables are often called garbage, because they are not useful 
for their original purpose, and they also cannot be reallocated 
for some new use in the program. Lost heap-dynamic variables  
are most often created by the following sequence of operations:

1.  Pointer p1 is set to point to a newly created heap- dynamic 

variable.

2.  p1  is  later  set  to  point  to  another  newly  created  heap- 

dynamic variable.

The first heap-dynamic variable is now inaccessible, or lost. 
This is sometimes called memory leakage. Memory leakage is 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   276

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.11  Pointer and Reference Types 

  277

a problem, regardless of whether the language uses implicit or explicit deal-
location. In the following sections, we investigate how language designers 
have dealt with the problems of dangling pointers and lost heap-dynamic 
variables.

6.11.4  Pointers in C and C++

In C and C++, pointers can be used in the same ways as addresses are used in 
assembly languages. This means they are extremely f lexible but must be used 
with great care. This design offers no solutions to the dangling pointer or lost 
heap-dynamic variable problems. However, the fact that pointer arithmetic is 
possible in C and C++ makes their pointers more interesting than those of the 
other programming languages.

C and C++ pointers can point at any variable, regardless of where it is allo-
cated. In fact, they can point anywhere in memory, whether there is a variable 
there or not, which is one of the dangers of such pointers.

In C and C++, the asterisk (*) denotes the dereferencing operation and the 
ampersand (&) denotes the operator for producing the address of a variable. For 
example, consider the following code:

int *ptr;
int count, init;
. . .
ptr = &init;
count = *ptr;

The assignment to the variable ptr sets it to the address of init. The assign-
ment to count dereferences ptr to produce the value at init, which is then 
assigned to count. So, the effect of the two assignment statements is to assign 
the value of init to count. Notice that the declaration of a pointer specifies 
its domain type.

Pointers can be assigned the address value of any variable of the correct 
domain type, or they can be assigned the constant zero, which is used for nil.
Pointer arithmetic is also possible in some restricted forms. For example, 
if ptr is a pointer variable that is declared to point at some variable of some 
data type, then

ptr + index

is  a  legal  expression.  The  semantics  of  such  an  expression  is  as  follows. 
Instead of simply adding the value of  index to ptr, the value of index is 
first scaled by the size of the memory cell (in memory units) to which ptr 
is pointing (its base type). For example, if ptr points to a memory cell for 
a type that is four memory units in size, then index is multiplied by 4, and 
the result is added to ptr. The primary purpose of this sort of address arith-
metic is array manipulation. The following discussion is related to single- 
dimensioned arrays only.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   277

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
278 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

In C and C++, all arrays use zero as the lower bound of their subscript 
ranges, and array names without subscripts always refer to the address of the 
first element. Consider the following declarations:

int list [10];
int *ptr;

Now consider the assignment

ptr = list;

This assigns the address of list[0] to ptr. Given this assignment, the fol-
lowing are true:

•  *(ptr + 1) is equivalent to list[1].

•  *(ptr + index) is equivalent to list[index].

•  ptr[index] is equivalent to list[index].

It is clear from these statements that the pointer operations include the same 
scaling that is used in indexing operations. Furthermore, pointers to arrays can 
be indexed as if they were array names.

Pointers in C and C++ can point to functions. This feature is used to pass 
functions as parameters to other functions. Pointers are also used for parameter 
passing, as discussed in Chapter 9.

C and C++ include pointers of type void *, which can point at values of 
any type. In effect they are generic pointers. However, type checking is not a 
problem with void * pointers, because these languages disallow dereferencing 
them. One common use of void  * pointers is as the types of parameters of 
functions that operate on memory. For example, suppose we wanted a function 
to move a sequence of bytes of data from one place in memory to another. It 
would be most general if it could be passed two pointers of any type. This 
would be legal if the corresponding formal parameters in the function were 
void  * type. The function could then convert them to char  * type and do 
the operation, regardless of what type pointers were sent as actual parameters.

6.11.5  Reference Types

A  reference  type  variable  is  similar  to  a  pointer,  with  one  important  and 
fundamental difference: A pointer refers to an address in memory, while a 
reference refers to an object or a value in memory. As a result, although it is 
natural to perform arithmetic on addresses, it is not sensible to do arithmetic 
on references.

C++ includes a special kind of reference type that is used primarily for the 
formal parameters in function definitions. A C++ reference type variable is a 
constant pointer that is always implicitly dereferenced. Because a C++ refer-
ence type variable is a constant, it must be initialized with the address of some 
variable in its definition, and after initialization a reference type variable can 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   278

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.11  Pointer and Reference Types 

  279

never be set to reference any other variable. The implicit dereference prevents 
assignment to the address value of a reference variable.

Reference type variables are specified in definitions by preceding their 

names with ampersands (&). For example,

int result = 0;
 int &ref_result = result;
. . .
ref_result = 100;

In this code segment, result and ref_result are aliases.

When used as formal parameters in function definitions, C++ reference 
types provide for two-way communication between the caller function and 
the called function. This is not possible with nonpointer primitive parame-
ter types, because C++ parameters are passed by value. Passing a pointer as a 
parameter accomplishes the same two-way communication, but pointer formal 
parameters require explicit dereferencing, making the code less readable and 
less safe. Reference parameters are referenced in the called function exactly as 
are other parameters. The calling function need not specify that a parameter 
whose corresponding formal parameter is a reference type is anything unusual. 
The compiler passes addresses, rather than values, to reference parameters.

In their quest for increased safety over C++, the designers of Java removed 
C++-style pointers altogether. Unlike C++ reference variables, Java reference 
variables can be assigned to refer to different class instances; they are not con-
stants. All Java class instances are referenced by reference variables. That is, 
in fact, the only use of reference variables in Java. These issues are discussed 
further in Chapter 12.

In the following, String is a standard Java class:

String str1;
. . .
str1 = "This is a Java literal string";

In this code, str1 is defined to be a reference to a String class instance or 
object. It is initially set to null. The subsequent assignment sets str1 to refer-
ence the String object, "This is a Java literal string".

Because Java class instances are implicitly deallocated (there is no explicit 

deallocation operator), there cannot be dangling references in Java.

C# includes both the references of Java and the pointers of C++. However, the 
use of pointers is strongly discouraged. In fact, any subprogram that uses pointers 
must include the unsafe modifier. Note that although objects pointed to by refer-
ences are implicitly deallocated, that is not true for objects pointed to by pointers. 
Pointers were included in C# primarily to allow C# programs to interoperate with 
C and C++ code.

All variables in the object-oriented languages Smalltalk, Python, and Ruby 
are  references.  They  are  always  implicitly  dereferenced.  Furthermore,  the 
direct values of these variables cannot be accessed.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   279

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
280 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

6.11.6  Evaluation

The problems of dangling pointers and garbage have already been discussed at 
length. The problems of heap management are discussed in Section 6.11.7.3.

Pointers have been compared with the goto. The goto statement widens 
the range of statements that can be executed next. Pointer variables widen 
the range of memory cells that can be referenced by a variable. Perhaps the 
most damning statement about pointers was made by Hoare (1973): “Their 
introduction into high-level languages has been a step backward from which 
we may never recover.”

On the other hand, pointers are essential in some kinds of programming 
applications. For example, pointers are necessary to write device drivers, in 
which specific absolute addresses must be accessed.

The references of Java and C# provide some of the f lexibility and the 
capabilities of pointers, without the hazards. It remains to be seen whether 
programmers will be willing to trade the full power of C and C++ pointers for 
the greater safety of references. The extent to which C# programs use pointers 
will be one measure of this.

6.11.7 

Implementation of Pointer and Reference Types

In most languages, pointers are used in heap management. The same is true 
for Java and C# references, as well as the variables in Smalltalk and Ruby, so 
we cannot treat pointers and references separately. First, we brief ly describe 
how pointers and references are represented internally. We then discuss two 
possible solutions to the dangling pointer problem. Finally, we describe the 
major problems with heap-management techniques.

6.11.7.1  Representations of Pointers and References

In most larger computers, pointers and references are single values stored in 
memory cells. However, in early microcomputers based on Intel micropro-
cessors, addresses have two parts: a segment and an offset. So, pointers and 
references are implemented in these systems as pairs of 16-bit cells, one for 
each of the two parts of an address.

6.11.7.2  Solutions to the Dangling-Pointer Problem

There have been several proposed solutions to the dangling-pointer problem. 
Among these are tombstones (Lomet, 1975), in which every heap-dynamic 
variable includes a special cell, called a tombstone, that is itself a pointer to the 
heap-dynamic variable. The actual pointer variable points only at tombstones 
and never to heap-dynamic variables. When a heap-dynamic variable is deallo-
cated, the tombstone remains but is set to nil, indicating that the heap-dynamic 
variable no longer exists. This approach prevents a pointer from ever pointing 
to a deallocated variable. Any reference to any pointer that points to a nil 
tombstone can be detected as an error.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   280

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.11  Pointer and Reference Types 

  281

Tombstones are costly in both time and space. Because tombstones are 
never deallocated, their storage is never reclaimed. Every access to a heap- 
dynamic variable through a tombstone requires one more level of indirection, 
which requires an additional machine cycle on most computers. Apparently 
none of the designers of the more popular languages have found the additional 
safety to be worth this additional cost, because no widely used language uses 
tombstones.

An alternative to tombstones is the locks-and-keys approach used in 
the implementation of UW-Pascal (Fischer and LeBlanc, 1977, 1980). In this 
compiler, pointer values are represented as ordered pairs (key, address), where 
the key is an integer value. Heap-dynamic variables are represented as the stor-
age for the variable plus a header cell that stores an integer lock value. When 
a heap-dynamic variable is allocated, a lock value is created and placed both 
in the lock cell of the heap-dynamic variable and in the key cell of the pointer 
that is specified in the call to new. Every access to the dereferenced pointer 
compares the key value of the pointer to the lock value in the heap-dynamic 
variable. If they match, the access is legal; otherwise the access is treated as a 
run-time error. Any copies of the pointer value to other pointers must copy 
the key value. Therefore, any number of pointers can reference a given heap- 
dynamic variable. When a heap-dynamic variable is deallocated with dispose, 
its lock value is cleared to an illegal lock value. Then, if a pointer other than 
the one specified in the dispose is dereferenced, its address value will still be 
intact, but its key value will no longer match the lock, so the access will not 
be allowed.

Of course, the best solution to the dangling-pointer problem is to take 
deallocation of heap-dynamic variables out of the hands of programmers. If 
programs cannot explicitly deallocate heap-dynamic variables, there will be no 
dangling pointers. To do this, the run-time system must implicitly deallocate 
heap-dynamic variables when they are no longer useful. Lisp systems have 
always done this. Both Java and C# also use this approach for their reference 
variables. Recall that C#’s pointers do not include implicit deallocation.

6.11.7.3  Heap Management

Heap management can be a very complex run-time process. We examine the 
process in two separate situations: one in which all heap storage is allocated and 
deallocated in units of a single size, and one in which variable-size segments are 
allocated and deallocated. Note that for deallocation, we discuss only implicit 
approaches. Our discussion will be brief and far from comprehensive, since a 
thorough analysis of these processes and their associated problems is not so 
much a language design issue as it is an implementation issue.

Single-Size Cells  The simplest situation is when all allocation and deallocation 
is of single-size cells. It is further simplified when every cell already contains 
a pointer. This is the scenario of many implementations of Lisp, where the 
problems of dynamic storage allocation were first encountered on a large scale. 
All Lisp programs and most Lisp data consist of cells in linked lists.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   281

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
282 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

In  a  single-size  allocation  heap,  all  available  cells  are  linked  together 
using the pointers in the cells, forming a list of available space. Allocation is a 
 simple matter of taking the required number of cells from this list when they 
are needed. Deallocation is a much more complex process. A heap-dynamic 
 variable can be pointed to by more than one pointer, making it difficult to 
determine when the variable is no longer useful to the program. Simply because 
one pointer is disconnected from a cell obviously does not make it garbage; 
there could be several other pointers still pointing to the cell.

In Lisp, several of the most frequent operations in programs create collec-
tions of cells that are no longer accessible to the program and therefore should 
be deallocated (put back on the list of available space). One of the fundamental 
design goals of Lisp was to ensure that reclamation of unused cells would not 
be the task of the programmer but rather that of the run-time system. This goal 
left Lisp implementors with the fundamental design question: When should 
deallocation be performed?

There are several different approaches to garbage collection. The two most 
common traditional techniques are in some ways opposite processes. These are 
named reference counters, in which reclamation is incremental and is done 
when inaccessible cells are created, and mark-sweep, in which reclamation 
occurs only when the list of available space becomes empty. These two methods 
are sometimes called the eager approach and the lazy approach, respectively. 
Many variations of these two approaches have been developed. In this section, 
however, we discuss only the basic processes.

The reference counter method of storage reclamation accomplishes its goal 
by maintaining in every cell a counter that stores the number of pointers that 
are currently pointing at the cell. Embedded in the decrement operation for the 
reference counters, which occurs when a pointer is disconnected from the cell, 
is a check for a zero value. If the reference counter reaches zero, it means that 
no program pointers are pointing at the cell, and it has thus become garbage 
and can be returned to the list of available space.

There are three distinct problems with the reference counter method. 
First, if storage cells are relatively small, the space required for the counters 
is significant. Second, some execution time is obviously required to maintain 
the counter values. Every time a pointer value is changed, the cell to which it 
was pointing must have its counter decremented, and the cell to which it is 
now pointing must have its counter incremented. In a language like Lisp, in 
which nearly every action involves changing pointers, that can be a significant 
portion of the total execution time of a program. Of course, if pointer changes 
are not too frequent, this is not a problem. Some of the inefficiency of refer-
ence counters can be eliminated by an approach named deferred reference 
 counting, which avoids reference counters for some pointers. The third prob-
lem is that complications arise when a collection of cells is connected circularly. 
The problem here is that each cell in the circular list has a reference counter 
value of at least 1, which prevents it from being collected and placed back on 
the list of available space. A solution to this problem can be found in Friedman 
and Wise (1979).

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   282

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.11  Pointer and Reference Types 

  283

The advantage of the reference counter approach is that it is intrinsically 
incremental. Its actions are interleaved with those of the application, so it never 
causes significant delays in the execution of the application.

The original mark-sweep process of garbage collection operates as follows: 
The run-time system allocates storage cells as requested and disconnects point-
ers from cells as necessary, without regard for storage reclamation (allowing 
garbage to accumulate), until it has allocated all available cells. At this point, a 
mark-sweep process is begun to gather all the garbage left f loating around in 
the heap. To facilitate the process, every heap cell has an extra indicator bit or 
field that is used by the collection algorithm.

The mark-sweep process consists of three distinct phases. First, all cells 
in the heap have their indicators set to indicate they are garbage. This is, of 
course, a correct assumption for only some of the cells. The second part, called 
the marking phase, is the most difficult. Every pointer in the program is traced 
into the heap, and all reachable cells are marked as not being garbage. After 
this, the third phase, called the sweep phase, is executed: All cells in the heap 
that have not been specifically marked as still being used are returned to the 
list of available space.

To illustrate the f lavor of algorithms used to mark the cells that are cur-
rently in use, we provide the following simple version of a marking algorithm. 
We assume that all heap-dynamic variables, or heap cells, consist of an informa-
tion part; a part for the mark, named marker; and two pointers named llink 
and rlink. These cells are used to build directed graphs with at most two edges 
leading from any node. The marking algorithm traverses all spanning trees of 
the graphs, marking all cells that are found. Like other graph traversals, the 
marking algorithm uses recursion.

for every pointer r  do
    mark(r)

void mark(void  * ptr) {
    if (ptr != 0)
      if (*ptr.marker is not marked) {
        set *ptr.marker
        mark(*ptr.llink)
        mark(*ptr.rlink)
         }
}

An example of the actions of this procedure on a given graph is shown in 
Figure 6.9. This simple marking algorithm requires a great deal of storage (for 
stack space to support recursion). A marking process that does not require addi-
tional stack space was developed by Schorr and Waite (1967). Their method 
reverses pointers as it traces out linked structures. Then, when the end of a list 
is reached, the process can follow the pointers back out of the structure.

The most serious problem with the original version of mark-sweep was that 
it was done too infrequently—only when a program had used all or nearly all of 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   283

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
284 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

Figure 6.9

An example of the 
actions of the marking 
algorithm

r

1

x

2

7

x

x

3

6

x

x

8

10

x

x

4

5
x

9

11

x

x

x

12

Dashed lines show the order of node_marking

the heap storage. Mark-sweep in that situation takes a good deal of time, because 
most of the cells must be traced and marked as being currently used. This causes 
a significant delay in the progress of the application. Furthermore, the process 
may yield only a small number of cells that can be placed on the list of available 
space. This problem has been addressed in a variety of improvements. For exam-
ple, incremental mark-sweep garbage collection occurs more frequently, long 
before memory is exhausted, making the process more effective in terms of the 
amount of storage that is reclaimed. Also, the time required for each run of the 
process is obviously shorter, thus reducing the delay in application execution. 
Another alternative is to perform the mark-sweep process on parts, rather than 
all of the memory associated with the application, at different times. This pro-
vides the same kinds of improvements as incremental mark-sweep.

Both the marking algorithms for the mark-sweep method and the processes 
required by the reference counter method can be made more efficient by use of 
the pointer rotation and slide operations that are described by Suzuki (1982).

Variable-Size Cells  Managing a heap from which variable-size cells8 are allo-
cated has all the difficulties of managing one for single-size cells, but also has 
additional problems. Unfortunately, variable-size cells are required by most 
programming languages. The additional problems posed by variable-size cell 
management depend on the method used. If mark-sweep is used, the following 
additional problems occur:

8.  The cells have variable sizes because these are abstract cells, which store the values of 
 variables, regardless of their types. Furthermore, a variable could be a structured type.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   284

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
 
6.12  Optional Types 

  285

•  The initial setting of the indicators of all cells in the heap to indicate that 
they are garbage is difficult. Because the cells are different sizes, scanning 
them is a problem. One solution is to require each cell to have the cell size as 
its first field. Then the scanning can be done, although it takes slightly more 
space and somewhat more time than its counterpart for fixed-size cells.

•  The marking process is nontrivial. How can a chain be followed from a 
pointer if there is no predefined location for the pointer in the pointed-to cell? 
Cells that do not contain pointers at all are also a problem. Adding an internal 
pointer to each cell, which is maintained in the background by the run-time 
system, will work. However, this background maintenance processing adds 
both space and execution time overhead to the cost of running the program.

•  Maintaining the list of available space is another source of overhead. The 
list can begin with a single cell consisting of all available space. Requests 
for segments simply reduce the size of this block. Reclaimed cells are added 
to the list. The problem is that before long, the list becomes a long list of 
various-size segments, or blocks. This slows allocation because requests 
cause the list to be searched for sufficiently large blocks. Eventually, the 
list may consist of a large number of very small blocks, which are not large 
enough for most requests. At this point, adjacent blocks may need to be 
collapsed into larger blocks. Alternatives to using the first sufficiently large 
block on the list can shorten the search but require the list to be ordered 
by block size. In either case, maintaining the list is additional overhead.

If reference counters are used, the first two problems are avoided, but the 

available-space list-maintenance problem remains.

For a comprehensive study of memory management problems, see Wilson 

(2005).

6.12  Optional Types

There are situations in programming when there is a need to be able to indicate 
that a variable does not currently have a value. Some older languages use zero as a 
nonvalue for numeric variables. This approach has the disadvantage of not being 
able to distinguish between when the variable is supposed to have the zero value 
and when the zero indicates that it has no value. Some newer languages provide 
types that can have a normal value or a special value to indicate that their vari-
ables have no value. Variables that have this capability are called optional types. 
Optional types are now directly supported in C#, F#, and Swift, among others.
C# has two categories of variables, value and reference types. Reference 
types, which are classes, are optional types by their nature. The null value 
indicates that a reference type has no value. Value types, which are all struct 
types, can be declared to be optional types, which allows them to have the value 
null. A variable is declared to be an optional type by following its type name 
with a question mark (?), as in

int? x;

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   285

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
286 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

To determine whether a variable has a normal value, it can be tested against 
null, as in

int? x;
. . .
if(x == null)
   Console.WriteLine("x has no value");
else
   Console.WriteLine("The value of x is: {0}", x);

Swift’s optional types are similar to those of C#, except that the nonvalue is 
named nil, instead of null. The Swift version of the above code is:

var Int? x;
. . .
if  x  ==  nil
    print("x has no value")
else
    print("The value of x is: \(x)")

6.13  Type Checking

For our discussion of type checking, the concept of operands and operators 
is generalized to include subprograms and assignment statements. Subpro-
grams will be thought of as operators whose operands are their parameters. 
The assignment symbol will be thought of as a binary operator, with its target 
variable and its expression being the operands.

Type checking is the activity of ensuring that the operands of an operator are 
of compatible types. A compatible type is one that either is legal for the operator 
or is allowed under language rules to be implicitly converted by compiler- generated 
code (or the interpreter) to a legal type. This automatic conversion is called a 
coercion. For example, if an int variable and a float variable are added in Java, 
the value of the int variable is coerced to float and a floating-point add is done.
A type error is the application of an operator to an operand of an inappro-
priate type. For example, in the original version of C, if an int value was passed 
to a function that expected a float value, a type error would occur (because 
compilers for that language did not check the types of parameters).

If all bindings of variables to types are static in a language, then type check-
ing can nearly always be done statically. Dynamic type binding requires type 
checking at run time, which is called dynamic type checking.

Some languages, such as JavaScript and PHP, because of their dynamic 
type binding, allow only dynamic type checking. It is better to detect errors 
at compile time than at run time, because the earlier correction is usually less 
costly. The penalty for static checking is reduced programmer f lexibility. Fewer 
shortcuts and tricks are possible. Such techniques, though, are now generally 
recognized to be error prone and detrimental to readability.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   286

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.14  Strong Typing 

  287

Type checking is complicated when a language allows a memory cell to 
store values of different types at different times during execution. Such memory 
cells can be created with C and C++ unions and the discriminated unions of 
ML, Haskell, and F#. In these cases, type checking, if done, must be dynamic 
and requires the run-time system to maintain the type of the current value of 
such memory cells. So, even though all variables are statically bound to types 
in languages such as C++, not all type errors can be detected by static type 
checking.

6.14  Strong Typing

One of the ideas in language design that became prominent in the so-called 
structured-programming revolution of the 1970s was strong typing. Strong 
typing is widely acknowledged as being a highly valuable language charac-
teristic. Unfortunately, it is often loosely defined, and it is sometimes used in 
computing literature without being defined at all.

A  programming  language  is  strongly  typed  if  type  errors  are  always 
detected. This requires that the types of all operands can be determined, either 
at compile time or at run time. The importance of strong typing lies in its abil-
ity to detect all misuses of variables that result in type errors. A strongly typed 
language also allows the detection, at run time, of uses of the incorrect type 
values in variables that can store values of more than one type.

C and C++ are not strongly typed languages because both include union 

types, which are not type checked.

ML is strongly typed, even though the types of some function parameters 

may not be known at compile time. F# is strongly typed.

Java and C#, although they are based on C++, are nearly strongly typed. 
Types can be explicitly cast, which could result in a type error. However, there 
are no implicit ways type errors can go undetected.

The coercion rules of a language have an important effect on the value of 
type checking. For example, expressions are strongly typed in Java. However, 
an arithmetic operator with one f loating-point operand and one integer oper-
and is legal. The value of the integer operand is coerced to f loating-point, and 
a f loating-point operation takes place. This is what is usually intended by the 
programmer. However, the coercion also results in a loss of one of the benefits 
of strong typing—error detection. For example, suppose a program had the 
int variables a and b and the float variable d. Now, if a programmer meant 
to type a + b, but mistakenly typed a + d, the error would not be detected 
by the compiler. The value of a would simply be coerced to float. So, the 
value of strong typing is weakened by coercion. Languages with a great deal 
of coercion, like C, and C++, are less reliable than those with no coercion, 
such as ML and F#. Java and C# have half as many assignment type coercions 
as C++, so their error detection is better than that of C++, but still not nearly 
as effective as that of ML and F#. The issue of coercion is examined in detail 
in Chapter 7.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   287

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
288 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

6.15  Type Equivalence

The idea of type compatibility was defined when the issue of type checking 
was introduced. The compatibility rules dictate the types of operands that are 
acceptable for each of the operators and thereby specify the possible type errors 
of the language.9 The rules are called compatibility because in some cases the 
type of an operand can be implicitly converted by the compiler or run-time 
system to make it acceptable for the operator.

The type compatibility rules are simple and rigid for the predefined scalar 
types. However, in the cases of structured types, such as arrays and records 
and some user-defined types, the rules are more complex. Coercion of these 
types is rare, so the issue is not type compatibility, but type equivalence. That 
is, two types are equivalent if an operand of one type in an expression can be 
substituted for one of the other type, without coercion. Type equivalence is a 
strict form of type compatibility—compatibility without coercion. The central 
issue here is how type equivalence is defined.

The  design  of  the  type  equivalence  rules  of  a  language  is  important, 
because it inf luences the design of the data types and the operations provided 
for values of those types. With the types discussed here, there are very few pre-
defined operations. Perhaps the most important result of two variables being 
of equivalent types is that either one can have its value assigned to the other.

There are two approaches to defining type equivalence: name type equiva-
lence and structure type equivalence. Name type equivalence means that two 
variables have equivalent types if they are defined either in the same declaration 
or in declarations that use the same type name. Structure type equivalence 
means that two variables have equivalent types if their types have identical 
structures. There are some variations of these two approaches, and many lan-
guages use combinations of them.

Name type equivalence is easy to implement but is more restrictive. Under 
a strict interpretation, a variable whose type is a subrange of the integers would 
not be equivalent to an integer type variable. For example, supposing Ada used 
strict name type equivalence, consider the following Ada code:

type Indextype is 1..100;
count : Integer;
index : Indextype;

The types of the variables count and index would not be equivalent; count 
could not be assigned to index or vice versa.

Another problem with name type equivalence arises when a structured or 
user-defined type is passed among subprograms through parameters. Such a 
type must be defined only once, globally. A subprogram cannot state the type 

9.  Type compatibility is also an issue in the relationship between the actual parameters in a sub-
program call and the formal parameters of the subprogram definition. This issue is  discussed 
in Chapter 9.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   288

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
 
6.15  Type Equivalence 

  289

of such formal parameters in local terms. This was the case with the original 
version of Pascal.

Note that to use name type equivalence, all types must have names. Most 
languages allow users to define types that are anonymous—they do not have 
names. For a language to use name type equivalence, such types must implicitly 
be given internal names by the compiler.

Structure type equivalence is more f lexible than name type equivalence, 
but it is more difficult to implement. Under name type equivalence, only the 
two type names must be compared to determine equivalence. Under structure 
type equivalence, however, the entire structures of the two types must be com-
pared. This comparison is not always simple. (Consider a data structure that 
refers to its own type, such as a linked list.) Other questions can also arise. For 
example, are two record (or struct) types equivalent if they have the same 
structure but different field names? Are two single-dimensioned array types in 
a language that allows lower bounds of array subscript ranges to be set in their 
declarations equivalent if they have the same element type but have subscript 
ranges of 0..10 and 1..11? Are two enumeration types equivalent if they have 
the same number of components but spell the literals differently?

Another difficulty with structure type equivalence is that it disallows dif-
ferentiating between types with the same structure. For example, consider the 
following Ada-like declarations:

type Celsius = Float;
     Fahrenheit = Float;

The types of variables of these two types are considered equivalent under 
structure type equivalence, allowing them to be mixed in expressions, which 
is surely undesirable in this case, considering the difference indicated by the 
type’s names. In general, types with different names are likely to be abstrac-
tions of different categories of problem values and should not be considered 
equivalent.

Ada uses a restrictive form of name type equivalence but provides two type 
constructs, subtypes and derived types, that avoid the problems associated with 
name type equivalence. A derived type is a new type that is based on some 
previously defined type with which it is not equivalent, although it may have 
identical structure. Derived types inherit all the properties of their parent types. 
Consider the following example:

type Celsius is new Float;
type Fahrenheit is new Float;

The types of variables of these two derived types are not equivalent, although 
their structures are identical. Furthermore, variables of neither type is type 
equivalent with any other f loating-point type. Literals are exempt from the 
rule. A literal such as 3.0 has the type universal real and is type equivalent to 
any f loating-point type. Derived types can also include range constraints on 
the parent type, while still inheriting all of the parent’s operations.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   289

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
290 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

An Ada subtype is a possibly range-constrained version of an existing type. 
A subtype is type equivalent with its parent type. For example, consider the 
following declaration:

subtype Small_type is Integer range 0..99;

The type Small_type is equivalent to the type Integer.

Note that Ada’s derived types are very different from Ada’s subrange types. 

For example, consider the following type declarations:

type Derived_Small_Int is new Integer range 1..100;
subtype Subrange_Small_Int is Integer range 1..100;

Variables of both types, Derived_Small_Int and Subrange_Small_Int, have 
the same range of legal values and both inherit the operations of Integer. 
However, variables of type Derived_Small_Int are not compatible with any 
Integer type. On the other hand, variables of type Subrange_Small_Int 
are compatible with variables and constants of Integer type and any subtype 
of Integer.

For variables of an Ada unconstrained array type, structure type equiva-
lence is used. For example, consider the following type declaration and two 
object declarations:

type Vector is array (Integer range <>) of Integer;
Vector_1: Vector (1..10);
Vector_2: Vector (11..20);

The types of these two objects are equivalent, even though they have differ-
ent names and different subscript ranges, because for objects of unconstrained 
array types, structure type equivalence rather than name type equivalence is 
used. Because both types have 10 elements and the elements of both are of type 
Integer, they are type equivalent.

For constrained anonymous types, Ada uses a highly restrictive form of 
name type equivalence. Consider the following Ada declarations of constrained 
anonymous types:

A : array (1..10) of Integer;

In this case, A has an anonymous but unique type assigned by the compiler and 
unavailable to the program. If we also had

B : array (1..10) of Integer;

A and B would be of anonymous but distinct and not equivalent types, though 
they are structurally identical. The multiple declaration

C, D : array (1..10) of Integer;

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   290

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.15  Type Equivalence 

  291

creates two anonymous types, one for C and one for D, which are not equiv-
alent.  This  declaration  is  actually  treated  as  if  it  were  the  following  two 
declarations:

C : array (1..10) of Integer;
D : array (1..10) of Integer;

Note that Ada’s form of name type equivalence is more restrictive than the 
name type equivalence that is defined at the beginning of this section. If we 
had written instead

type List_10 is array (1..10) of Integer;
C, D : List_10;

then the types of C and D would be equivalent.

Name type equivalence works well for Ada, in part because all types, except 
anonymous arrays, are required to have type names (and anonymous types are 
given internal names by the compiler).

Type equivalence rules for Ada are more rigid than those for languages 
that have many coercions among types. For example, the two operands of an 
addition operator in Java can have virtually any combination of numeric types 
in the language. One of the operands will simply be coerced to the type of 
the other. But in Ada, there are no coercions of the operands of an arithmetic 
operator.

C uses both name and structure type equivalence. Every struct, enum, 
and union declaration creates a new type that is not equivalent to any other 
type. So, name type equivalence is used for structure, enumeration, and union 
types. Other nonscalar types use structure type equivalence. Array types are 
equivalent if they have the same type components. Also, if an array type has a 
constant size, it is equivalent either to other arrays with the same constant size 
or to with those without a constant size. Note that typedef in C and C++ does 
not introduce a new type; it simply defines a new name for an existing type. 
So, any type defined with typedef is type equivalent to its parent type. One 
exception to C using name type equivalence for structures, enumerations, and 
unions is if two structures, enumerations, or unions are defined in different 
files, in which case structural type equivalence is used. This is a loophole in the 
name type equivalence rule to allow equivalence of structures, enumerations, 
and unions that are defined in different files.

C++ is like C except there is no exception for structures and unions defined 

in different files.

In languages that do not allow users to define and name types, such as 

Fortran and COBOL, name equivalence obviously cannot be used.

Object-oriented languages such as Java and C++ bring another kind of 
type compatibility issue with them. The issue is object compatibility and its 
relationship to the inheritance hierarchy, which is discussed in Chapter 12.

Type compatibility in expressions is discussed in Chapter 7; type compat-

ibility for subprogram parameters is discussed in Chapter 9.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   291

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
292 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

6.16  Theory and Data Types

Type theory is a broad area of study in mathematics, logic, computer science, 
and philosophy. It began in mathematics in the early 1900s and later became 
a standard tool in logic. Any general discussion of type theory is necessarily 
complex, lengthy, and highly abstract. Even when restricted to computer sci-
ence, type theory includes such diverse and complex subjects as typed lambda 
calculus, combinators, the metatheory of bounded quantification, existential 
types, and higher-order polymorphism. All these topics are far beyond the 
scope of this book.

In computer science there are two branches of type theory: practical and 
abstract. The practical branch is concerned with data types in commercial pro-
gramming languages; the abstract branch primarily focuses on typed lambda 
calculus, an area of extensive research by theoretical computer scientists over 
the past half century. This section is restricted to a brief description of some 
of  the  mathematical  formalisms  that  underlie  data  types  in  programming 
languages.

A data type defines a set of values and a collection of operations on those 
values. A type system is a set of types and the rules that govern their use in 
programs. Obviously, every typed programming language defines a type system. 
The formal model of a type system of a programming language consists of a 
set of types and a collection of functions that define the type rules of the lan-
guage, which are used to determine the type of any expression. A formal system 
that describes the rules of a type system, attribute grammars, is introduced in 
Chapter 3.

An alternative model to attribute grammars uses a type map and a collection 
of functions, not associated with grammar rules, that specify the type rules. A 
type map is similar to the state of a program used in denotational semantics, 
consisting of a set of ordered pairs, with the first element of each pair being a 
variable’s name and the second element being its type. A type map is constructed 
using the type declarations in the program. In a static typed language, the type 
map need only be maintained during compilation, although it changes as the 
program is analyzed by the compiler. If any type checking is done dynamically, 
the type map must be maintained during execution. The concrete version of a 
type map in a compilation system is the symbol table, constructed primarily by 
the lexical and syntax analyzers. Dynamic types sometimes are maintained with 
tags attached to values or objects.

As stated previously, a data type is a set of values, although in a data type 
the elements are often ordered. For example, the elements in all enumera-
tion types are ordered. However, in a mathematical set the elements are not 
ordered. Despite this difference, set operations can be used on data types to 
describe new data types. The structured data types of programming languages 
are defined by type operators, or constructors that correspond to set operations. 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   292

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
6.16  Theory and Data Types 

  293

These set operations/type constructors are brief ly introduced in the following 
paragraphs.

A finite mapping is a function from a finite set of values, the domain set, 
onto values in the range set. Finite mappings model two different categories of 
types in programming languages, functions and arrays, although in some lan-
guages functions are not types. All languages include arrays, which are defined 
in terms of a mapping function that maps indices to elements in the array. For 
traditional arrays, the mapping is simple—integer values are mapped to the 
addresses of array elements; for associative arrays, the mapping is defined by a 
function that describes a hashing operation. The hashing function maps the 
keys of the associate arrays, usually character strings,10 to the addresses of the 
array elements.

.  For  example,  if  S1 =

A Cartesian, or cross product of n sets, S1, S2,  c, Sn, is a set denoted 
S1 * S2 * c * Sn.  Each  element  of  the  Cartesian  product  set  has  one 
(x, y) (cid:31)  x is in S1 
element from each of the constituent sets. So, S1 * S2 =
, S1 * S2 =
and y is in S2
  and  S2 =
. A Cartesian product defines tuples in mathemat-
ics, which appear in Python, ML, Swift, and F# as a data type (see Section 
5
6.5). Cartesian products also model records, or structs, although not exactly. 
Cartesian products do not have element names, but records require them. For 
example, consider the following C struct:

(1, a), (1, b), (2, a), (2, b)
6

a, b
5

1, 2

6

5

5

6

6

struct intFloat {
  int myInt;
  float myFloat;
};

This struct defines the Cartesian product type int  *  float. The names 

of the elements are myInt and myFloat.

is in S2

The union of two sets, S1 and S2, is defined as S1 h S2 =

x (cid:31)  x is in S1 or x 
. Set union models the union data types, as described in Section 6.10.
Mathematical subsets are defined by providing a rule that elements must 
follow. These sets model the subtypes of Ada, although not exactly, because 
subtypes must consist of contiguous elements of their parent sets. Elements of 
mathematical sets are unordered, so the model is not perfect.

6

5

Notice that pointers, defined with type operators, such as the asterisk in 

C, are not defined in terms of a set operation.

This concludes our discussion of formalisms in data types, as well as our 

whole discussion of data types.

10.  In Ruby, the associative array keys need not be character strings—they can be any type.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   293

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
294 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

S U M M A R Y

The data types of a language are a large part of what determines that language’s 
style and usefulness. Along with control structures, they form the heart of a 
language.

The primitive data types of most imperative languages include numeric, 
character, and Boolean types. The numeric types are often directly supported 
by hardware.

The user-defined enumeration and subrange types are convenient and add 

to the readability and reliability of programs.

Arrays are part of most programming languages. The relationship between 
a reference to an array element and the address of that element is given in 
an access function, which is an implementation of a mapping. Arrays can be 
either static, as in C++ arrays whose definition includes the static specifier; 
fixed stack-dynamic, as in C functions (without the  static specifier); fixed 
heap-dynamic, as with Java’s objects; or heap dynamic, as in Perl’s arrays. Most 
languages allow only a few operations on complete arrays.

Records are now included in most languages. Fields of records are specified 
in a variety of ways. In the case of COBOL, they can be referenced without 
naming all of the enclosing records, although this is messy to implement and 
harmful to readability. In several languages that support object-oriented pro-
gramming, records are supported with objects.

Tuples are similar to records, but do not have names for their constituent. 

parts. They are part of Python, ML, and F#.

Lists are staples of the functional programming languages, but are now also 

included in Python and C#.

Unions are locations that can store different type values at different times. 
Discriminated unions include a tag to record the current type value. A free 
union is one without the tag. Most languages with unions do not have safe 
designs for them, the exceptions being ML, Swift, and F#.

Pointers are used for addressing f lexibility and to control dynamic storage 
management. Pointers have some inherent dangers: Dangling pointers are dif-
ficult to avoid, and memory leakage can occur.

Reference types, such as those in Java and C#, provide heap management 

without the dangers of pointers.

Enumeration and record types are relatively easy to implement. Arrays 
are also straightforward, although array element access is an expensive process 
when the array has several subscripts. The access function requires one addition 
and one multiplication for each subscript.

Pointers are relatively easy to implement, if heap management is not con-
sidered. Heap management is easy if all cells have the same size but is compli-
cated for variable-size cell allocation and deallocation.

Optional type variables are variables that allow a nonvalue to be stored. 

This allows a program to indicate when a variable currently has no value.

Strong typing is the concept of requiring that all type errors be detected. 

The value of strong typing is increased reliability.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   294

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
Review Questions 

  295

The type equivalence rules of a language determine what operations are 
legal among the structured types of a language. Name type equivalence and 
structure type equivalence are the two fundamental approaches to defining 
type equivalence.

Type theories have been developed in many areas. In computer science, the 
practical branch of type theory defines the types and type rules of programming 
languages. Set theory can be used to model most of the structured data types 
in programming languages.

B I B L I O G R A P H I C   N O T E S

A wealth of literature exists that is concerned with data type design, use, and 
implementation. Hoare gives one of the earliest systematic definitions of struc-
tured types in Dahl et al. (1972). A general discussion of a wide variety of data 
types is given in Cleaveland (1986).

Implementing run-time checks on the possible insecurities of Pascal data 
types is discussed in Fischer and LeBlanc (1980). Most compiler design books, 
such as Fischer and LeBlanc (1991) and Aho et al. (1986), describe implemen-
tation methods for data types, as do the other programming language texts, 
such as Pratt and Zelkowitz (2001) and Scott (2009). A detailed discussion of 
the problems of heap management can be found in Tenenbaum et al. (1990). 
Garbage-collection methods are developed by Schorr and Waite (1967) and 
Deutsch and Bobrow (1976). A comprehensive discussion of garbage-collection 
algorithms can be found in Cohen (1981) and Wilson (2005).

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  What is a descriptor?

2.  What are the advantages and disadvantages of decimal data types?

3.  What are the design issues for character string types?

4.  Describe the three string length options.
5.  Define ordinal, enumeration, and subrange types.
6.  What are the advantages of user-defined enumeration types?

7.  In what ways are the user-defined enumeration types of C# more reliable 

than those of C++?

8.  What are the design issues for arrays?
9.  Define static, fixed stack-dynamic, fixed heap-dynamic, and heap-dynamic 

arrays. What are the advantages of each?

10.  What happens when a nonexistent element of an array is referenced in 

Perl?

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   295

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
296 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

11.  How does JavaScript support sparse arrays?

12.  What languages support negative subscripts?

13.  What languages support array slices with stepsizes?

14.  What is an aggregate constant?
15.  Define row major order and column major order.
16.  What is an access function for an array?

17.  What are the required entries in a Java array descriptor, and when must 

they be stored (at compile time or run time)?

18.  What is the structure of an associative array?
19.  What is the purpose of level numbers in COBOL records?
20.  Define fully qualified and elliptical references to fields in records.
21.  What is the primary difference between a record and a tuple?

22.  Are the tuples of Python mutable?

23.  What is the purpose of an F# tuple pattern?

24.  In what primarily imperative language do lists serve as arrays?

25.  What is the action of the Scheme function CAR?

26.  What is the action of the F# function tl?

27.  In what way does Scheme’s CDR function modify its parameter?

28.  On what are Python’s list comprehensions based?
29.  Define union, free union, and discriminated union.
30.  Are the unions of F# discriminated?

31.  What are the design issues for pointer types?

32.  What are the two common problems with pointers?

33.  Why are the pointers of most languages restricted to pointing at a single 

type variable?

34.  What is a C++ reference type, and what is its common use?

35.  Why are reference variables in C++ better than pointers for formal 

parameters?

36.  What advantages do Java and C# reference type variables have over the 

pointers in other languages?

37.  Describe the lazy and eager approaches to reclaiming garbage.

38.  Why wouldn’t arithmetic on Java and C# references make sense?

39.  What is a compatible type?

40.  Define type error.

41.  Define strongly typed.
42.  Why is Java not strongly typed?
43.  What is a nonconverting cast?
44.  What languages have no type coercions?

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   296

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
Problem Set 

  297

45.  Why are C and C++ not strongly typed?

46.  What is name type equivalence?

47.  What is structure type equivalence?

48.  What is the primary advantage of name type equivalence?

49.  What is the primary disadvantage to structure type equivalence?

50.  For what types does C use structure type equivalence?

51.  What set operation models C’s struct data type?

P R O B L E M   S E T

1.  What are the arguments for and against representing Boolean values as 

single bits in memory?

2.  How does a decimal value waste memory space?

3.  VAX minicomputers use a format for f loating-point numbers that is 

not the same as the IEEE standard. What is this format, and why was 
it chosen by the designers of the VAX computers? A reference for VAX 
f loating-point representations is Sebesta (1991).

4.  Compare the tombstone and lock-and-key methods of avoiding dangling 
pointers, from the points of view of safety and implementation cost.

5.  What disadvantages are there in implicit dereferencing of pointers, but 

only in certain contexts?

6.  Explain all of the differences between Ada’s subtypes and derived types.

7.  What significant justification is there for the -> operator in C and C++?

8.  What are all of the differences between the enumeration types of C++ 

and those of Java?

9.  Multidimensional arrays can be stored in row major order, as in C++, or 
in column major order, as in Fortran. Develop the access functions for 
both of these arrangements for three-dimensional arrays.

10.  In the Burroughs Extended ALGOL language, matrices are stored as a 

single-dimensioned array of pointers to the rows of the matrix, which are 
treated as single-dimensioned arrays of values. What are the advantages 
and disadvantages of such a scheme?

11.  Analyze and write a comparison of C’s malloc and free functions with 

C++’s new and delete operators. Use safety as the primary consideration 
in the comparison.

12.  Analyze and write a comparison of using C++ pointers and Java reference 

variables to refer to fixed heap-dynamic variables. Use safety and 
convenience as the primary considerations in the comparison.

13.  Write a short discussion of what was lost and what was gained in Java’s 

designers’ decision to not include the pointers of C++.

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   297

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
298 

  Chapter 6  

 Data Types

14.  What are the arguments for and against Java’s implicit heap storage 
recovery, when compared with the explicit heap storage recovery 
required in C++? Consider real-time systems.

15.  What are the arguments for the inclusion of enumeration types in C#, 

although they were not in the first few versions of Java?

16.  What would you expect to be the level of use of pointers in C#? How 

often will they be used when it is not absolutely necessary?

17.  Make two lists of applications of matrices, one for those that require 
jagged matrices and one for those that require rectangular matrices. 
Now, argue whether just jagged, just rectangular, or both should be 
included in a programming language.

18.  Compare the string manipulation capabilities of the class libraries of 

C++, Java, and C#.

19.  Look up the definition of strongly typed as given in Gehani (1983) and 

compare it with the definition given in this chapter. How do they differ?

20.  In what way is static type checking better than dynamic type checking?

21.  Explain how coercion rules can weaken the beneficial effect of strong 

typing.

P R O G R A M M I N G   E X E R C I S E S

1.  Design a set of simple test programs to determine the type compatibility 
rules of a C compiler to which you have access. Write a report of your 
findings.

2.  Determine whether some C compiler to which you have access 

implements the free function.

3.  Write a program that does matrix multiplication in some language that 

does subscript range checking and for which you can obtain an assembly 
language or machine language version from the compiler. Determine 
the number of instructions required for the subscript range checking 
and compare it with the total number of instructions for the matrix 
multiplication process.

4.  If you have access to a compiler in which the user can specify whether 
subscript range checking is desired, write a program that does a large 
number of matrix accesses and time their execution. Run the program 
with subscript range checking and without it, and compare the times.

5.  Write a simple program in C++ to investigate the safety of its 
enumeration types. Include at least 10 different operations on 
enumeration types to determine what incorrect or just silly things are 

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   298

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
 
Programming Exercises 

  299

legal. Now, write a C# program that does the same things and run it to 
determine how many of the incorrect or silly things are legal. Compare 
your results.

6.  Write a program in C++ or C# that includes two different enumeration 
types and has a significant number of operations using the enumeration 
types. Also write the same program using only integer variables. 
Compare the readability and predict the reliability differences between 
the two programs.

7.  Write a C program that does a large number of references to elements 
of two-dimensioned arrays, using only subscripting. Write a second 
program that does the same operations but uses pointers and pointer 
arithmetic for the storage-mapping function to do the array references. 
Compare the time efficiency of the two programs. Which of the two 
programs is likely to be more reliable? Why?

8.  Write a Perl program that uses a hash and a large number of operations 
on the hash. For example, the hash could store people’s names and 
their ages. A random-number generator could be used to create three-
character names and ages, which could be added to the hash. When a 
duplicate name was generated, it would cause an access to the hash but 
not add a new element. Rewrite the same program without using hashes. 
Compare the execution efficiency of the two. Compare the ease of 
programming and readability of the two.

9.  Write a program in the language of your choice that behaves differently 

if the language used name equivalence than if it used structural 
equivalence.

10.  For what types of A and B is the simple assignment statement A = B 

legal in C++ but not Java?

M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   299

1/5/18   10:41 PM

 
 
 
M06_SEBE8029_12_SE_C06.indd   300

1/5/18   10:41 PM
