# Fuente
- archivo: 325-388.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/Robert W. Sebesta - Concepts of Programming Languages-Pearson (2019)/325-388.pdf
- extraido: 2026-04-27T21:02:15

# Contenido

7 

Expressions and 
 Assignment Statements

  7.1  Introduction

  7.2  Arithmetic Expressions

  7.3  Overloaded Operators

  7.4  Type Conversions

  7.5  Relational and Boolean Expressions

  7.6  Short-Circuit Evaluation

  7.7  Assignment Statements

  7.8  Mixed-Mode Assignment

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   301

1/5/18   10:43 PM

301

302 

  Chapter 7  

 Expressions and  Assignment Statements

A s the title indicates, the topic of this chapter is expressions and assignment 

statements. The semantics rules that determine the order of evaluation of 
operators in expressions are discussed first. This is followed by an explanation 

of a potential problem with operand evaluation order when functions can have side 
effects. Overloaded operators, both predefined and user defined, are then discussed, 
along with their effects on the expressions in programs. Next, mixed-mode expressions 
are described and evaluated. This leads to the definition and evaluation of widening 
and narrowing type conversions, both implicit and explicit. Relational and Boolean 
expressions are then discussed, including the process of short-circuit evaluation. 
Finally, the assignment statement, from its simplest form to all of its variations, is 
 covered, including assignments as expressions and mixed-mode assignments.

Character string pattern-matching expressions were covered as a part of the 
 material on character strings in Chapter 6, so they are not mentioned in this chapter.

7.1  Introduction

Expressions are the fundamental means of specifying computations in a pro-
gramming language. It is crucial for a programmer to understand both the 
syntax and semantics of expressions of the language he or she uses. A formal 
mechanism (BNF) for describing the syntax of expressions was introduced in 
Chapter 3. In this chapter, the semantics of expressions are discussed.

To understand expression evaluation, it is necessary to be familiar with the 
orders of operator and operand evaluation. The operator evaluation order of 
expressions is dictated by the associativity and precedence rules of the language. 
Although the value of an expression sometimes depends on it, the order of oper-
and evaluation in expressions is often unstated by language designers. This allows 
implementors to choose the order, which leads to the possibility of programs 
producing different results in different implementations. Other issues in expres-
sion semantics are type mismatches, coercions, and short-circuit evaluation.

The essence of the imperative programming languages is the dominant 
role of assignment statements. The purpose of these statements is to cause the 
side effect of changing the values of variables, or the state, of the program. So 
an integral part of all imperative languages is the concept of variables whose 
values change during program execution.

Functional languages use variables of a different sort, such as the param-
eters of functions. These languages also have declaration statements that bind 
values to names. These declarations are similar to assignment statements, but 
do not have side effects.

7.2  Arithmetic Expressions

Automatic evaluation of arithmetic expressions similar to those found in math-
ematics, science, and engineering was one of the primary goals of the first 
high-level programming languages. Most of the characteristics of arithmetic 

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   302

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
7.2  Arithmetic Expressions 

  303

expressions in programming languages were inherited from conventions that 
had evolved in mathematics. In programming languages, arithmetic expressions 
consist of operators, operands, parentheses, and function calls. An operator 
can be unary, meaning it has a single operand, binary, meaning it has two 
operands, or ternary, meaning it has three operands.

In most programming languages, binary operators are infix, which means 
they appear between their operands. One exception is Perl, which has some 
operators that are prefix, which means they precede their operands. In Scheme 
and Lisp, all operators are prefix. Most unary operators are prefix, but the ++ 
and -- operators of C-based languages can be either prefix or postfix.

The purpose of an arithmetic expression is to specify an arithmetic com-
putation. An implementation of such a computation must cause two actions: 
fetching the operands, usually from memory, and executing arithmetic opera-
tions on those operands. In the following sections, we investigate the common 
design details of arithmetic expressions.

Following are the primary design issues for arithmetic expressions, all of 

which are discussed in this section:

•  What are the operator precedence rules?
•  What are the operator associativity rules?

•  What is the order of operand evaluation?

•  Are there restrictions on operand evaluation side effects?

•  Does the language allow user-defined operator overloading?

•  What type mixing is allowed in expressions?

7.2.1  Operator Evaluation Order

The operator precedence and associativity rules of a language dictate the order 
of evaluation of its operators.

7.2.1.1  Precedence

The value of an expression depends at least in part on the order of evaluation 
of the operators in the expression. Consider the following expression:

a + b * c

Suppose the variables a, b, and c have the values 3, 4, and 5, respectively. If 
evaluated left to right (the addition first and then the multiplication), the result 
is 35. If evaluated right to left, the result is 23.

Instead of simply evaluating the operators in an expression from left to 
right or right to left, mathematicians long ago developed the concept of plac-
ing operators in a hierarchy of evaluation priorities and basing the evaluation 
order of expressions partly on this hierarchy. For example, in mathematics, 
multiplication is considered to be of higher priority than addition, perhaps due 
to its higher level of complexity. If that convention were applied in the previous 

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   303

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
304 

  Chapter 7  

 Expressions and  Assignment Statements

example expression, as would be the case in most programming languages, the 
multiplication would be done first.

The operator precedence rules for expression evaluation partially define 
the order in which the operators of different precedence levels are evaluated. 
The operator precedence rules for expressions are based on the hierarchy of 
operator priorities, as seen by the language designer. The operator precedence 
rules of the common imperative languages are nearly all the same, because 
they are based on those of mathematics. In these languages, exponentiation 
has the highest precedence (when it is provided by the language), followed by 
multiplication and division on the same level, followed by binary addition and 
subtraction on the same level.

Many languages also include unary versions of addition and subtraction. 
Unary addition is called the identity operator because it usually has no asso-
ciated operation and thus has no effect on its operand. Ellis and Stroustrup 
(1990, p. 56), speaking about C++, call it a historical accident and correctly 
label it useless. Unary minus, of course, changes the sign of its operand. In Java 
and C#, unary minus also causes the implicit conversion of short and byte 
operands to int type.

In all of the common imperative languages, the unary minus operator can 
appear in an expression either at the beginning or anywhere inside the expres-
sion, as long as it is parenthesized to prevent it from being next to another 
operator. For example,

a + (- b) * c

is legal, but

a + - b * c

usually is not.

Next, consider the following expressions:

- a / b
- a * b
- a ** b

In the first two cases, the relative precedence of the unary minus operator and the 
binary operator is irrelevant—the order of evaluation of the two operators has 
no effect on the value of the expression. In the last case, however, it does matter.
Of  the  common  programming  languages,  only  Fortran,  Ruby,  Visual 
Basic, and Ada have the exponentiation operator. In all four, exponentiation 
has higher precedence than unary minus, so

- A ** B

is equivalent to

-(A ** B)

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   304

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
7.2  Arithmetic Expressions 

  305

The precedences of the arithmetic operators of Ruby and the C-based 

languages are as follows:

Highest

Lowest

Ruby
**
unary +, -
*, /, %
binary +, -

C-Based Languages
postfix ++, --
prefix ++, --, unary +, -
*, /, %
binary +, -

The  ** operator is exponentiation. The % operator takes two integer 
operands and yields the remainder of the first after division by the second.1 The 
++ and -- operators of the C-based languages are described in Section 7.7.4.

APL is odd among languages because it has a single level of precedence, as 

illustrated in the next section.

Precedence accounts for only some of the rules for the order of operator 

evaluation; associativity rules also affect it.

7.2.1.2  Associativity

Consider the following expression:

a - b + c - d

If the addition and subtraction operators have the same level of precedence, as 
they do in programming languages, the precedence rules say nothing about the 
order of evaluation of the operators in this expression.

When an expression contains two adjacent2 occurrences of operators with 
the same level of precedence, the question of which operator is evaluated first 
is answered by the associativity rules of the language. An operator can have 
either left or right associativity, meaning that when there are two adjacent 
operators with the same precedence, the left operator is evaluated first or the 
right operator is evaluated first, respectively.

Associativity in common languages is left to right, except that the expo-
nentiation operator (when provided) sometimes associates right to left. In the 
Java expression

a - b + c

the left operator is evaluated first.

1.  In versions of C before C99, the % operator was implementation dependent in some 

 situations, because division was also implementation dependent.

2.  We call operators “adjacent” if they are separated by a single operand.

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   305

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
 
306 

  Chapter 7  

 Expressions and  Assignment Statements

Exponentiation in Fortran and Ruby is right associative, so in the expression

A ** B ** C

the right operator is evaluated first.

In Visual Basic, the exponentiation operator, ^, is left associative.
The associativity rules for a few common languages are given here:

Language

Ruby

Associativity Rule

Left: *, /, +, -

Right: **

C-based languages

Left: *, /, %, binary +, binary -

Right: ++, --, unary -, unary +

As stated in Section 7.2.1.1, in APL, all operators have the same level of 
precedence. Thus, the order of evaluation of operators in APL expressions is 
determined entirely by the associativity rule, which is right to left for all oper-
ators. For example, in the expression

A × B + C

the addition operator is evaluated first, followed by the multiplication operator 
(× is the APL multiplication operator). If A were 3, B were 4, and C were 5, then 
the value of this APL expression would be 27.

Many compilers for the common languages make use of the fact that some 
arithmetic operators are mathematically associative, meaning that the associa-
tivity rules have no impact on the value of an expression containing only those 
operators. For example, addition is mathematically associative, so in mathemat-
ics the value of the expression

A + B + C

does not depend on the order of operator evaluation. If f loating-point opera-
tions for mathematically associative operations were also associative, the com-
piler could use this fact to perform some simple optimizations. Specifically, if 
the compiler is allowed to reorder the evaluation of operators, it may be able 
to produce slightly faster code for expression evaluation. Compilers commonly 
do these kinds of optimizations.

Unfortunately, in a computer, both f loating-point representations and 
f loating-point arithmetic operations are only approximations of their mathe-
matical counterparts (because of size limitations). The fact that a mathematical 
operator is associative does not necessarily imply that the corresponding com-
puter f loating-point operation is associative. In fact, only if all the operands 
and intermediate results can be exactly represented in f loating-point notation 
will the process be precisely associative. For example, there are pathological 

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   306

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
7.2  Arithmetic Expressions 

  307

situations in which integer addition on a computer is not associative. For exam-
ple, suppose that a program must evaluate the expression

A + B + C + D

and that A and C are very large positive numbers, and B and D are negative 
numbers with very large absolute values. In this situation, adding B to A does 
not cause an overf low exception, but adding C to A does. Likewise, adding C to 
B does not cause overf low, but adding D to B does. Because of the limitations 
of computer arithmetic, addition is catastrophically nonassociative in this case. 
Therefore, if the compiler reorders these addition operations, it affects the value 
of the expression. This problem, of course, can be avoided by the programmer, 
assuming the approximate values of the variables are known. The programmer 
can specify the expression in two parts (in two assignment statements), ensuring 
that overf low is avoided. However, this situation can arise in far more subtle 
ways, in which the programmer is less likely to notice the order dependence.

7.2.1.3  Parentheses

Programmers can alter the precedence and associativity rules by placing paren-
theses in expressions. A parenthesized part of an expression has precedence over 
its adjacent unparenthesized parts. For example, although multiplication has 
precedence over addition, in the expression

(A + B) * C

the addition will be evaluated first. Mathematically, this is perfectly natural. In 
this expression, the first operand of the multiplication operator is not available 
until the addition in the parenthesized subexpression is evaluated. Also, the 
expression from Section 7.2.1.2 could be specified as

(A + B) + (C + D)

to avoid overf low.

Languages that allow parentheses in arithmetic expressions could dispense 
with all precedence rules and simply associate all operators left to right or right 
to left. The programmer would specify the desired order of evaluation with 
parentheses. This approach would be simple because neither the author nor the 
readers of programs would need to remember any precedence or associativity 
rules. The disadvantage of this scheme is that it makes writing expressions more 
tedious, and it also seriously compromises the readability of the code. Yet this 
was the choice made by Ken Iverson, the designer of APL.

7.2.1.4  Ruby Expressions

Recall that Ruby is a pure object-oriented language, which means, among other 
things, that every data value, including literals, is an object. Ruby supports the 
collection of arithmetic and logic operations that are included in the C-based 

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   307

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
308 

  Chapter 7  

 Expressions and  Assignment Statements

languages. What sets Ruby apart from the C-based languages in the area of 
expressions is that all of the arithmetic, relational, and assignment operators, 
as well as array indexing, shifts, and bitwise logic operators, are implemented 
as methods. For example, the expression a  +  b is a call to the  + method of 
the object referenced by a, passing the object referenced by b as a parameter.

One interesting result of the implementation of operators as methods is 
that they can be overridden by application programs. Therefore, these oper-
ators can be redefined. While it is often not useful to redefine operators for 
predefined types, it is useful, as we will see in Section 7.3, to define predefined 
operators for user-defined types, which can be done with operator overloading 
in some languages.

In C++ and Ada, operators are actually implemented as function calls.

7.2.1.5  Expressions in Lisp

As is the case with Ruby, all arithmetic and logic operations in Lisp are per-
formed by subprograms. But in Lisp, the subprograms must be explicitly called. 
For example, to specify the C expression a + b * c in Lisp, one must write 
the following expression:3

(+ a (* b c))

In this expression, + and * are the names of functions.

7.2.1.6  Conditional Expressions

if-then-else statements can be used to perform a conditional expression 
assignment. For example, consider

if  (count == 0)
  average = 0;
else
  average = sum / count;

In the C-based languages, this code can be specified more conveniently in an 
assignment statement using a conditional expression, which has the following form:

expression_1 ? expression_2 : expression_3

where expression_1 is interpreted as a Boolean expression. If expression_1 eval-
uates to true, the value of the whole expression is the value of expression_2; 
otherwise, it is the value of expression_3. For example, the effect of the example 
if-then-else can be achieved with the following assignment statement, using 
a conditional expression:

average = (count == 0) ? 0 : sum / count;

3.  When a list is interpreted as code in Lisp, the first element is the function name and others 

are parameters to the function.

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   308

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
 
7.2  Arithmetic Expressions 

  309

In effect, the question mark denotes the beginning of the then clause, and the 
colon marks the beginning of the else clause. Both clauses are mandatory. 
Note that ? is used in conditional expressions as a ternary operator.

Conditional expressions can be used anywhere in a program (in a C-based 
language) where any other expression can be used. In addition to the C-based 
languages, conditional expressions are provided in Perl, JavaScript, and Ruby.

7.2.2  Operand Evaluation Order

A less commonly discussed design characteristic of expressions is the order 
of evaluation of operands. Variables in expressions are evaluated by fetching 
their values from memory. Constants are sometimes evaluated the same way. 
In other cases, a constant may be part of the machine language instruction and 
not require a memory fetch. If an operand is a parenthesized expression, all of 
the operators it contains must be evaluated before its value can be used as an 
operand.

If neither of the operands of an operator has side effects, then operand 
evaluation order is irrelevant. Therefore, the only interesting case arises when 
the evaluation of an operand does have side effects.

7.2.2.1  Side Effects

A side effect of a function, naturally called a functional side effect, occurs when 
the function changes either one of its parameters or a global variable. (A global 
variable is declared outside the function but is accessible in the function.)

Consider the following expression:

a + fun(a)

If fun does not have the side effect of changing a, then the order of evaluation 
of the two operands, a and fun(a), has no effect on the value of the expression. 
However, if fun changes a, there is an effect. Consider the following situation: 
fun returns 10 and changes the value of its parameter to 20. Suppose we have 
the following:

a = 10;
b = a + fun(a);

Then, if the value of a is fetched first (in the expression evaluation process), 
its value is 10 and the value of the expression is 20. But if the second operand 
is evaluated first, then the value of the first operand is 20 and the value of the 
expression is 30.

The following C program illustrates the same problem when a function 

changes a global variable that appears in an expression:

int a = 5;
int fun1() {

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   309

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
310 

  Chapter 7  

 Expressions and  Assignment Statements

   a = 17;
   return  3;
}   /* end of fun1 */
 void  main() {
   a = a + fun1();
}   /* end of main */

The value computed for a in main depends on the order of evaluation of the 
operands in the expression a + fun1(). The value of a will be either 8 (if a is 
evaluated first) or 20 (if the function call is evaluated first).

Note that functions in mathematics do not have side effects, because there 
is no notion of variables in mathematics. The same is true for functional pro-
gramming languages. In both mathematics and functional programming lan-
guages, functions are much easier to reason about and understand than those 
in imperative languages, because their context is irrelevant to their meaning.

There are two possible solutions to the problem of operand evaluation 
order and side effects. First, the language designer could disallow function 
evaluation from affecting the value of expressions by simply disallowing func-
tional side effects. Second, the language definition could state that operands in 
expressions are to be evaluated in a particular order and demand that imple-
mentors guarantee that order.

Disallowing functional side effects in the imperative languages is difficult, 
and it eliminates some f lexibility for the programmer. Consider the case of C 
and C++, which have only functions, meaning that all subprograms return one 
value. To eliminate the side effects of two-way parameters and still provide sub-
programs that return more than one value, the values would need to be placed 
in a struct and the struct returned. Access to globals in functions would also 
have to be disallowed. However, when efficiency is important, using access to 
global variables to avoid parameter passing is an important method of increas-
ing execution speed. In compilers, for example, global access to data such as 
the symbol table is commonplace.

The problem with having a strict evaluation order is that some code opti-
mization techniques used by compilers involve reordering operand evaluations. 
A guaranteed order disallows those optimization methods when function calls 
are involved. There is, therefore, no perfect solution, as is borne out by actual 
language designs.

The Java language definition guarantees that operands appear to be eval-
uated in left-to-right order, eliminating the problem discussed in this section.

7.2.2.2  Referential Transparency and Side Effects

The concept of referential transparency is related to and affected by functional 
side effects. A program has the property of referential transparency if any two 
expressions in the program that have the same value can be substituted for one 
another anywhere in the program, without affecting the action of the program. 
The  value  of  a  referentially  transparent  function  depends  entirely  on  its 

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   310

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
7.3  Overloaded Operators 

  311

parameters.4 The connection of referential transparency and functional side 
effects is illustrated by the following example:

result1 = (fun(a) + b) / (fun(a) - c);
temp = fun(a);
result2 = (temp + b) / (temp - c);

If the function fun has no side effects, result1 and result2 will be equal, 
because the expressions assigned to them are equivalent. However, suppose 
fun has the side effect of adding 1 to either b or c. Then result1 would not 
be equal to result2. So, that side effect violates the referential transparency 
of the program in which the code appears.

There are several advantages to referentially transparent programs. The 
most important of these is that the semantics of such programs is much eas-
ier to understand than the semantics of programs that are not referentially 
transparent. Being referentially transparent makes a function equivalent to a 
mathematical function, in terms of ease of understanding.

Because they do not have variables, programs written in pure functional 
languages are referentially transparent. Functions in a pure functional language 
cannot have state, which would be stored in local variables. If such a function 
uses a value from outside the function, that value must be a constant, since there 
are no variables. Therefore, the value of the function depends on the values of 
its parameters.

Referential transparency will be further discussed in Chapter 15.

7.3  Overloaded Operators

Arithmetic operators are often used for more than one purpose. For example, 
+ usually is used to specify integer addition and f loating-point addition. Some 
languages—Java, for example—also use it for string catenation. This multiple 
use of an operator is called operator overloading and is generally thought to 
be acceptable, as long as neither readability nor reliability suffers.

As an example of the possible dangers of overloading, consider the use of 
the ampersand (&) in C++. As a binary operator, it specifies a bitwise logical 
AND operation. As a unary operator, however, its meaning is totally different. 
As a unary operator with a variable as its operand, the expression value is the 
address of that variable. In this case, the ampersand is called the address-of 
operator. For example, the execution of

x = &y;

4.  Furthermore, the value of the function cannot depend on the order in which its parameters 

are evaluated.

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   311

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
312 

  Chapter 7  

 Expressions and  Assignment Statements

causes the address of y to be placed in x. There are two problems with this 
multiple use of the ampersand. First, using the same symbol for two completely 
unrelated operations is detrimental to readability. Second, the simple keying 
error of leaving out the first operand for a bitwise AND operation can go 
undetected by the compiler, because it is interpreted as an address-of operator. 
Such an error may be difficult to diagnose.

Virtually all programming languages have a less serious but similar prob-
lem, which is often due to the overloading of the minus operator. The problem 
is only that the compiler cannot tell if the operator is meant to be binary or 
unary.5 So once again, failure to include the first operand when the operator is 
meant to be binary cannot be detected as an error by the compiler. However, 
the  meanings  of  the  two  operations,  unary  and  binary,  are  at  least  closely 
related, so readability is not adversely affected.

Some  languages  that  support  abstract  data  types  (see  Chapter  11),  for 
example, C++, C#, and F#, allow the programmer to further overload operator 
symbols. For instance, suppose a user wants to define the * operator between 
a scalar integer and an integer array to mean that each element of the array is 
to be multiplied by the scalar. Such an operator could be defined by writing a 
function subprogram named * that performs this new operation. The compiler 
will choose the correct meaning when an overloaded operator is specified, 
based on the types of the operands, as with language-defined overloaded oper-
ators. For example, if this new definition for * is defined in a C# program, a C# 
compiler will use the new definition for * whenever the * operator appears with 
a simple integer as the left operand and an integer array as the right operand.
When sensibly used, user-defined operator overloading can aid readability. 
For example, if + and * are overloaded for a matrix abstract data type and A, B, 
C, and D are variables of that type, then

A * B + C * D

can be used instead of

MatrixAdd(MatrixMult(A, B), MatrixMult(C, D))

On the other hand, user-defined overloading can be harmful to readability. 
For one thing, nothing prevents a user from defining + to mean multiplication. 
Furthermore, seeing an * operator in a program, the reader must find both 
the types of the operands and the definition of the operator to determine its 
meaning. Any or all of these definitions could be in other files.

Another consideration is the process of building a software system from 
modules created by different groups. If the different groups overloaded the 
same operators in different ways, these differences would obviously need to be 
eliminated before putting the system together.

5.  ML alleviates this problem by using different symbols for unary and binary minus operators, 

tilde (') for unary and dash (- ) for binary.

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   312

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
 
7.4  Type Conversions 

  313

C++ has a few operators that cannot be overloaded. Among these are the 
class or structure member operator (.) and the scope resolution operator (::). 
Interestingly, operator overloading was one of the C++ features that was not 
copied into Java. However, it did reappear in C#.

The implementation of user-defined operator overloading is discussed in 

Chapter 9.

7.4  Type Conversions

Type conversions are either narrowing or widening. A narrowing conversion 
converts a value to a type that cannot store even approximations of all of the 
values of the original type. For example, converting a double to a float in Java 
is a narrowing conversion, because the range of double is much larger than that 
of float. A widening conversion converts a value to a type that can include 
at least approximations of all of the values of the original type. For example, 
converting an int to a float in Java is a widening conversion. Widening con-
versions are nearly always safe, meaning that the approximate magnitude of the 
converted value is maintained. Narrowing conversions are not always safe—
sometimes the magnitude of the converted value is changed in the process. For 
example, if the f loating-point value 1.3E25 is converted to an integer in a Java 
program, the result will not be in any way related to the original value.

Although widening conversions are usually safe, they can result in reduced 
accuracy. In many language implementations, although integer-to-f loating-
point conversions are widening conversions, some precision may be lost. For 
example, in many cases, integers are stored in 32 bits, which allows at least 9 
decimal digits of precision. But f loating-point values are also stored in 32 bits, 
with only about seven decimal digits of precision (because of the space used for 
the exponent). So, integer-to-f loating-point widening can result in the loss of 
two digits of precision.

Coercions  of  nonprimitive  types  are,  of  course,  more  complex.  In  
Chapter 5, the complications of assignment compatibility of array and record 
types were discussed. There is also the question of what parameter types and 
return types of a method allow it to override a method in a superclass—only 
when the types are the same, or also some other situations. That issue, as well 
as the concept of subclasses as subtypes, are discussed in Chapter 12.

Type conversions can be either explicit or implicit. The following two 

subsections discuss these kinds of type conversions.

7.4.1  Coercion in Expressions

One  of  the  design  decisions  concerning  arithmetic  expressions  is  whether 
an operator can have operands of different types. Languages that allow such 
expressions, which are called mixed-mode expressions, must define conven-
tions for implicit operand type conversions because computers do not have 
binary operations that take operands of different types. Recall that in Chapter 5,  

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   313

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
314 

  Chapter 7  

 Expressions and  Assignment Statements

coercion was defined as an implicit type conversion that is initiated by the 
compiler or runtime system. Type conversions explicitly requested by the pro-
grammer are referred to as explicit conversions, or casts, not coercions.

Although some operator symbols may be overloaded, we assume that a 
computer system, either in hardware or in some level of software simulation, 
has an operation for each operand type and operator defined in the lan-
guage.6 For overloaded operators in a language that uses static type binding, 
the compiler chooses the correct type of operation on the basis of the types 
of the operands. When the two operands of an operator are not of the same 
type and that is legal in the language, the compiler must choose one of them 
to  be  coerced  and  generate  the  code  for  that  coercion.  In  the  following 
discussion, the coercion design choices of several common languages are 
examined.

Language designers are not in agreement on the issue of coercions in arith-
metic expressions. Those against a broad range of coercions are concerned 
with the reliability problems that can result from such coercions, because they 
reduce the benefits of type checking. Those who would rather include a wide 
range of coercions are more concerned with the loss in f lexibility that results 
from restrictions. The issue is whether programmers should need to be con-
cerned with this category of errors or whether the compiler should detect them.
As a simple illustration of the problem, consider the following Java code:

int a;
float b, c, d;
. . .
d = b * a;

Assume that the second operand of the multiplication operator was supposed 
to be c, but because of a keying error it was typed as a. Because mixed-mode 
expressions are legal in Java, the compiler would not detect this as an error. It 
would simply insert code to coerce the value of the int operand, a, to float. 
If mixed-mode expressions were not legal in Java, this keying error would have 
been detected by the compiler as a type error.

Because  error  detection  is  reduced  when  mixed-mode  expressions  are 
allowed, F#, Ada, and ML do not allow them. For example, they do not allow 
mixing of integer and f loating-point operands in expressions.

In  most  of  the  other  common  languages,  there  are  no  restrictions  on 

mixed-mode arithmetic expressions.

The C-based languages have integer types that are smaller than the int 
type. In Java, these are byte and short. Operands of all of these types are 
coerced to int whenever virtually any operator is applied to them. So, while 
data can be stored in variables of these types, it cannot be manipulated before 
conversion to a larger type. For example, consider the following Java code:

6.  This assumption is not true for many languages. An example is given later in this section.

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   314

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
 
histor y note

As a more extreme example of 
the dangers and costs of too 
much coercion, consider PL/I’s 
efforts to achieve flexibility in 
expressions. In PL/I, a char-
acter string variable can be 
the operand of an arithmetic 
operator with an integer as the 
other operand. At run time, the 
string is scanned for a numeric 
value. If the value happens 
to contain a decimal point, 
the value is assumed to be of 
 floating-point type, the other 
operand is coerced to floating 
point, and the resulting operation 
is  floating-point. This coercion 
policy is very expensive, because 
both the type check and the con-
version must be done at run time. 
It also eliminates the possibility 
of detecting programmer errors 
in expressions, because a binary 
operator can combine an oper-
and of any type with an operand 
of virtually any other type.

7.4  Type Conversions 

  315

byte  a, b, c;
. . .
a = b + c;

The values of b and c are coerced to int and an int addition 
is performed. Then, the sum is converted to byte and put in a. 
Given the large size of the memories of contemporary comput-
ers, there is little incentive to use byte and short, unless a large 
number of them must be stored.

7.4.2  Explicit Type Conversion

Most languages provide some capability for doing explicit conver-
sions, both widening and narrowing. In some cases, warning mes-
sages are produced when an explicit narrowing conversion results 
in a significant change to the value of the object being converted.
In  the  C-based  languages,  explicit  type  conversions  are 
called casts. To specify a cast, the desired type is placed in paren-
theses just before the expression to be converted, as in

(int)angle

One of the reasons for the parentheses around the type name 
in these conversions is that the first of these languages, C, has 
several two-word type names, such as long int.

In ML and F#, the casts have the syntax of function calls. 

For example, in F# we could have the following:

float(sum)

7.4.3  Errors in Expressions

A number of errors can occur during expression evaluation. If the language 
requires  type  checking,  either  static  or  dynamic,  then  operand  type  errors 
cannot occur. The errors that can occur because of coercions of operands in 
expressions have already been discussed. The other kinds of errors are due to 
the limitations of computer arithmetic and the inherent limitations of arith-
metic. The most common error occurs when the result of an operation cannot 
be  represented  in  the  memory  cell  where  it  must  be  stored.  This  is  called 
overf low or underf low, depending on whether the result was too large or 
too small. One limitation of arithmetic is that division by zero is disallowed. 
Of course, the fact that it is not mathematically allowed does not prevent a 
program from attempting to do it.

Floating-point overf low, underf low, and division by zero are examples 
of run-time errors, which are sometimes called exceptions. Language facil-
ities that allow programs to detect and deal with exceptions are discussed in 
Chapter 14.

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   315

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
316 

  Chapter 7  

 Expressions and  Assignment Statements

7.5  Relational and Boolean Expressions

In addition to arithmetic expressions, programming languages support rela-
tional and Boolean expressions.

7.5.1  Relational Expressions

A relational operator is an operator that compares the values of its two operands. 
A relational expression has two operands and one relational operator. The value 
of a relational expression is Boolean, except when Boolean is not a type included 
in the language. The relational operators are often overloaded for a variety of 
types. The operation that determines the truth or falsehood of a 
relational expression depends on the operand types. It can be simple, 
as for integer operands, or complex, as for character string operands. 
Typically, the types of the operands that can be used for relational 
operators are numeric types, strings, and enumeration types.

The  syntax  of  the  relational  operators  for  equality  and 
inequality  differs  among  some  programming  languages.  For 
example, for inequality, the C-based languages use !=, Fortran 
95+ uses .NE. or <>, and ML and F# use <>.

histor y note

The Fortran I designers used 
English abbreviations for the 
relational operators because the 
symbols > and < were not on 
the card punches at the time of 
 Fortran I’s design (mid-1950s).

JavaScript and PHP have two additional relational operators, 
=== and !==. These are similar to their relatives, == and !=, but prevent their 
operands from being coerced. For example, the expression

"7" == 7

is true in JavaScript, because when a string and a number are the operands of a 
relational operator, the string is coerced to a number. However,

"7" === 7

is false, because no coercion is done on the operands of this operator.

Ruby uses == for the equality relational operator that uses coercions, and 
eql? for equality with no coercions. Ruby uses === only in the when clause of 
its case statement, as discussed in Chapter 8.

The relational operators always have lower precedence than the arithmetic 

operators, so that in expressions such as

a + 1 > 2 * b

the arithmetic expressions are evaluated first.

7.5.2  Boolean Expressions

Boolean expressions consist of Boolean variables, Boolean constants, relational 
expressions, and Boolean operators. The operators usually include those for 
the AND, OR, and NOT operations, and sometimes for exclusive OR and 

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   316

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
7.5  Relational and Boolean Expressions 

  317

equivalence. Boolean operators usually take only Boolean operands (Boolean 
variables,  Boolean  literals,  or  relational  expressions)  and  produce  Boolean 
values.

In the mathematics of Boolean algebras, the OR and AND operators must 
have equal precedence. However, the C-based languages assign a higher pre-
cedence to AND than OR. Perhaps this resulted from the baseless correlation 
of multiplication with AND and of addition with OR, which would naturally 
assign higher precedence to AND.

Because arithmetic expressions can be the operands of relational expres-
sions, and relational expressions can be the operands of Boolean expressions, 
the three categories of operators must be placed in different precedence levels, 
relative to each other.

The precedence of the arithmetic, relational, and Boolean operators in the 

C-based languages is as follows:

Highest

postfix ++, --

unary +, unary -, prefix ++, --, !

*, /, %

binary +, binary -

<, >, <=, >=

=, !=

&&

||

Lowest

Versions of C prior to C99 are odd among the popular imperative lan-
guages in that they have no Boolean type and thus no Boolean values. Instead, 
numeric values are used to represent Boolean values. In place of Boolean oper-
ands, scalar variables (numeric or character) and constants are used, with zero 
considered false and all nonzero values considered true. The result of evaluating 
such an expression is an integer, with the value 0 if false and 1 if true. Arithmetic 
expressions can also be used for Boolean expressions in C99 and C++.

One odd result of C’s design of relational expressions is that the following 

expression is legal:

a > b > c

The leftmost relational operator is evaluated first because the relational 
operators of C are left associative, producing either 0 or 1. Then, this result is 
compared with the variable c. There is never a comparison between b and c 
in this expression.

Some languages, including Perl and Ruby, provide two sets of the binary 
logic operators, && and and for AND and || and or for OR. One difference 
between && and and (and || and or) is that the spelled versions have lower 
precedence. Also, and and or have equal precedence, but && has higher prece-
dence than ||.

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   317

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
318 

  Chapter 7  

 Expressions and  Assignment Statements

When the nonarithmetic operators of the C-based languages are included, 
there are more than 40 operators and at least 14 different levels of precedence. 
This is clear evidence of the richness of the collections of operators and the 
complexity of expressions possible in these languages.

Readability  dictates  that  a  language  should  include  a  Boolean  type,  as 
was stated in Chapter 6, rather than simply using numeric types in Boolean 
expressions. Some error detection is lost in the use of numeric types for Bool-
ean operands, because any numeric expression, whether intended or not, is a 
legal operand to a Boolean operator. In the other imperative languages, any 
non-Boolean expression used as an operand of a Boolean operator is detected 
as an error.

7.6  Short-Circuit Evaluation

A short-circuit evaluation of an expression is one in which the result is deter-
mined without evaluating all of the operands and/or operators. For example, 
the value of the arithmetic expression

(13 * a) * (b / 13 - 1)

is independent of the value of (b / 13 - 1) if a is 0, because 0 * x = 0 for 
any x. So, when a is 0, there is no need to evaluate (b / 13 - 1) or perform 
the second multiplication. However, in arithmetic expressions, this shortcut is 
not easily detected during execution, so it is never taken.

The value of the Boolean expression

(a >= 0) && (b < 10)

is independent of the second relational expression if a < 0, because the expres-
sion (FALSE && (b < 10)) is FALSE for all values of b. So, when a is less than 
zero, there is no need to evaluate b, the constant 10, the second relational 
expression, or the && operation. Unlike the case of arithmetic expressions, this 
shortcut easily can be discovered during execution.

To  illustrate  a  potential  problem  with  non-short-circuit  evaluation  of 
Boolean expressions, suppose Java did not use short-circuit evaluation. A table 
lookup loop could be written using the while statement. One simple version of 
Java code for such a lookup, assuming that list, which has listlen elements, 
is the array to be searched and key is the searched-for value, is

index = 0;
while ((index < listlen) && (list[index] != key))
  index = index + 1;

If evaluation is not short-circuit, both relational expressions in the Boolean 
expression of the while statement are evaluated, regardless of the value of the 

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   318

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
7.7  Assignment Statements 

  319

first. Thus, if key is not in list, the program will terminate with a subscript 
out-of-range exception. The same iteration that has index == listlen will 
reference  list[listlen], which causes the indexing error because list is 
declared to have listlen-1 as an upper-bound subscript value.

If a language provides short-circuit evaluation of Boolean expressions and 
it is used, this is not a problem. In the preceding example, a short-circuit eval-
uation scheme would evaluate the first operand of the AND operator, but it 
would skip the second operand if the first operand is false.

A language that provides short-circuit evaluations of Boolean expressions 
and also has side effects in expressions allows subtle errors to occur. Suppose 
that short-circuit evaluation is used on an expression and part of the expression 
that contains a side effect is not evaluated; then the side effect will occur only in 
complete evaluations of the whole expression. If program correctness depends 
on the side effect, short-circuit evaluation can result in a serious error. For 
example, consider the Java expression

(a > b) || ((b++) / 3)

In this expression,  b is changed (in the second arithmetic expression) only 
when a  <=  b. If the programmer assumed b would be changed every time 
this expression is evaluated during execution (and the program’s correctness 
depends on it), the program will fail.

In the C-based languages, the usual AND and OR operators, && and ||, 
respectively, are short-circuit. However, these languages also have bitwise AND 
and OR operators, & and |, respectively, that can be used on Boolean-valued 
operands and are not short-circuit. Of course, the bitwise operators are only 
equivalent to the usual Boolean operators if all operands are restricted to being 
either 0 (for false) or 1 (for true).

All of the logical operators of Ruby, Perl, ML, F#, and Python are short- 

circuit evaluated.

7.7  Assignment Statements

As we have previously stated, the assignment statement is one of the central 
constructs in imperative languages. It provides the mechanism by which the 
user can dynamically change the bindings of values to variables. In the follow-
ing section, the simplest form of assignment is discussed. Subsequent sections 
describe a variety of alternatives.

7.7.1  Simple Assignments

Nearly all programming languages currently being used use the equal sign for 
the assignment operator. All of these must use something different from an 
equal sign for the equality relational operator to avoid confusion with their 
assignment operator.

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   319

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
320 

  Chapter 7  

 Expressions and  Assignment Statements

ALGOL 60 pioneered the use of := as the assignment operator, which 
avoids the confusion of assignment with equality. Ada also uses this assignment 
operator.

The design choices of how assignments are used in a language have varied 
widely. In some languages, such as Fortran and Ada, an assignment can appear 
only as a stand-alone statement, and the destination is restricted to a single 
variable. There are, however, many alternatives.

7.7.2  Conditional Targets

Perl allows conditional targets on assignment statements. For example, consider

($flag ? $count1 : $count2) = 0;

which is equivalent to

if ($flag) {
  $count1 = 0;
} else  {
  $count2 = 0;
}

7.7.3  Compound Assignment Operators

A compound assignment operator is a shorthand method of specifying a 
commonly needed form of assignment. The form of assignment that can be 
abbreviated with this technique has the destination variable also appearing as 
the first operand in the expression on the right side, as in

a = a + b

Compound assignment operators were introduced by ALGOL 68, were 
later adopted in a slightly different form by C, and are part of the other C-based 
languages, as well as Perl, JavaScript, Python, and Ruby. The syntax of these 
assignment operators is the catenation of the desired binary operator to the = 
operator. For example,

sum += value;

is equivalent to

sum = sum + value;

The languages that support compound assignment operators have versions for 
most of their binary operators.

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   320

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
7.7.4  Unary Assignment Operators

7.7  Assignment Statements 

  321

The C-based languages, Perl, and JavaScript include two special unary arith-
metic  operators  that  are  actually  abbreviated  assignments.  They  combine 
increment and decrement operations with assignment. The operators ++ for 
increment and -- for decrement can be used either in expressions or to form 
stand-alone single-operator assignment statements. They can appear either as 
prefix operators, meaning that they precede the operands, or as postfix opera-
tors, meaning that they follow the operands. In the assignment statement

sum = ++ count;

the value of count is incremented by 1 and then assigned to sum. This opera-
tion could also be stated as

count = count + 1;
sum = count;

If the same operator is used as a postfix operator, as in

sum = count ++;

the assignment of the value of count to sum occurs first; then count is incre-
mented. The effect is the same as that of the two statements

sum = count;
count = count + 1;

An example of the use of the unary increment operator to form a complete 

assignment statement is

count ++;

which simply increments count. It does not look like an assignment, but it 
certainly is one. It is equivalent to the statement

count = count + 1;

When two unary operators apply to the same operand, the association is 

right to left. For example, in

- count ++

count is first incremented and then negated. So, it is equivalent to

- (count ++)

rather than

(- count) ++

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   321

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
322 

  Chapter 7  

 Expressions and  Assignment Statements

7.7.5  Assignment as an Expression

In the C-based languages, Perl, and JavaScript, the assignment statement pro-
duces a result, which is the same as the value assigned to the target. It can 
therefore be used as an expression and as an operand in other expressions. This 
design treats the assignment operator much like any other binary operator, 
except that it has the side effect of changing its left operand. For example, in 
C, it is common to write statements such as

while ((ch = getchar()) != EOF) { ... }

In this statement, the next character from the standard input file, usually the 
keyboard, is gotten with getchar and assigned to the variable ch. The result, or 
value assigned, is then compared with the constant EOF. If ch is not equal to EOF, 
the compound statement {...} is executed. Note that the assignment must be 
parenthesized—in the languages that support assignment as an expression, the 
precedence of the assignment operator is lower than that of the relational oper-
ators. Without the parentheses, the new character would be compared with EOF 
first. Then, the result of that comparison, either 0 or 1, would be assigned to ch.
The disadvantage of allowing assignment statements to be operands in 
expressions is that it provides yet another kind of expression side effect. This 
type of side effect can lead to expressions that are difficult to read and under-
stand. An expression with any kind of side effect has this disadvantage. Such an 
expression cannot be read as an expression, which in mathematics is a denota-
tion of a value, but only as a list of instructions with an odd order of execution. 
For example, the expression

a = b + (c = d / b) - 1

denotes the instructions

Assign d / b to c
Assign b + c to temp
Assign temp - 1 to a

Note that the treatment of the assignment operator as any other binary oper-
ator allows the effect of multiple-target assignments, such as

sum = count = 0;

in which count is first assigned the zero, and then count’s value is assigned to 
sum. This form of multiple-target assignments is also legal in Python.

There is a loss of error detection in the C design of the assignment opera-

tion that frequently leads to program errors. In particular, if we type

if  (x = y) ...

instead of

if  (x == y) ...

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   322

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
7.7  Assignment Statements 

  323

which is an easily made mistake, it is not detectable as an error by the com-
piler. Rather than testing a relational expression, the value that is assigned to 
x is tested (in this case, it is the value of y that reaches this statement). This is 
actually a result of two design decisions: allowing assignment to behave like 
an ordinary binary operator and using two very similar operators,  =  and  = = , 
to have completely different meanings. This is another example of the safety 
deficiencies of C and C++ programs. Note that Java and C# allow only boolean 
expressions in their if statements, disallowing this problem.

histor y note

7.7.6  Multiple Assignments

The PDP-11 computer, on 
which C was first implemented, 
has autoincrement and auto-
decrement addressing modes, 
which are hardware versions of 
the increment and decrement 
operators of C when they are 
used as array indices. One might 
guess from this that the design 
of these C operators was based 
on the design of the PDP-11 
architecture. That guess would 
be wrong, however, because 
the C operators were inherited 
from the B language, which 
was designed before the first 
PDP-11.

Several recent programming languages, including Perl and Ruby 
provide multiple-target, multiple-source assignment statements. 
For example, in Perl one can write

($first, $second, $third) = (20, 40, 60);

The semantics is that 20 is assigned to $first, 40 is assigned 
to $second, and 60 is assigned to $third. If the values of two 
variables must be interchanged, this can be done with a single 
assignment, as with

($first, $second) = ($second, $first);

This correctly interchanges the values of $first and $second, 
without the use of a temporary variable (at least one created and 
managed by the programmer).

The syntax of the simplest form of Ruby’s multiple assign-
ment is similar to that of Perl, except the left and right sides 
are not parenthesized. Also, Ruby includes a few more elaborate versions of 
multiple assignments, which are not discussed here.

7.7.7  Assignment in Functional Programming Languages

All of the identifiers used in pure functional languages and some of them used 
in other functional languages are just names of values. As such, their values 
never change. For example, in ML, names are bound to values with the val 
declaration, whose form is exemplified in the following:

val cost = quantity * price;

If cost appears on the left side of a subsequent val declaration, that declara-
tion creates a new version of the name cost, which has no relationship with 
the previous version, which is then hidden.

F# has a somewhat similar declaration that uses the let reserved word. 
The difference between F#’s let and ML’s val is that let creates a new scope, 

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   323

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
324 

  Chapter 7  

 Expressions and  Assignment Statements

whereas val does not. In fact, val declarations are often nested in let con-
structs in ML. let and val are further discussed in Chapter 15.

7.8  Mixed-Mode Assignment

Mixed-mode expressions were discussed in Section 7.4.1. Frequently, assign-
ment statements also are mixed mode. The design question is: Does the type 
of the expression have to be the same as the type of the variable being assigned, 
or can coercion be used in some cases of type mismatch?

C, C++, and Perl use coercion rules for mixed-mode assignment that are 
similar to those they use for mixed-mode expressions; that is, many of the 
possible type mixes are legal, with coercion freely applied.7

In a clear departure from C++, Java and C# allow mixed-mode assignment 
only if the required coercion is widening.8 So, an int value can be assigned to a 
float variable, but not vice versa. Disallowing half of the possible mixed-mode 
assignments is a simple but effective way to increase the reliability of Java and 
C#, relative to C and C++.

Of course, in functional languages, where assignments are just used to 

name values, there is no such thing as a mixed-mode assignment.

S U M M A R Y

Expressions consist of constants, variables, parentheses, function calls, and 
operators. Assignment statements include target variables, assignment oper-
ators, and expressions.

The semantics of an expression is determined in large part by the order of 
evaluation of operators. The associativity and precedence rules for operators 
in the expressions of a language determine the order of operator evaluation 
in those expressions. Operand evaluation order is important if functional side 
effects are possible. Type conversions can be widening or narrowing. Some 
narrowing conversions produce erroneous values. Implicit type conversions, 
or coercions, in expressions are common, although they eliminate the error- 
detection benefit of type checking, thus lowering reliability.

Assignment statements have appeared in a wide variety of forms, including 

conditional targets, assigning operators, and list assignments.

7.  Note that in Python and Ruby, types are associated with objects, not variables, so there is no 

such thing as mixed-mode assignment in those languages.

8.  Not quite true: If an integer literal, which the compiler by default assigns the type int, is 

assigned to a char, byte, or short variable and the literal is in the range of the type of the 
variable, the int value is coerced to the type of the variable in a narrowing conversion. This 
narrowing conversion cannot result in an error.

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   324

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

Problem Set 

  325

1.  Define operator precedence and operator associativity.
2.  What is a ternary operator?

3.  What is a prefix operator?

4.  What operator usually has right associativity?

5.  What is a nonassociative operator?

6.  What associativity rules are used by APL?
7.  What is the difference between the way operators are implemented in 

C++ and Ruby?

8.  Define functional side effect.
9.  What is a coercion?

10.  What is a conditional expression?

11.  What is an overloaded operator?
12.  Define narrowing and widening conversions.
13.  In JavaScript, what is the difference between == and ===?

14.  What is a mixed-mode expression?

15.  What is referential transparency?

16.  What are the advantages of referential transparency?

17.  How does operand evaluation order interact with functional side effects?

18.  What is short-circuit evaluation?

19.  Name a language that always does short-circuit evaluation of Boolean 

expressions. Name one that never does it.

20.  How does C support relational and Boolean expressions?

21.  What is the purpose of a compound assignment operator?

22.  What is the associativity of C’s unary arithmetic operators?

23.  What is one possible disadvantage of treating the assignment operator as 

if it were an arithmetic operator?

24.  What two languages include multiple assignments?

25.  What mixed-mode assignments are allowed in Java?

26.  What mixed-mode assignments are allowed in ML?

27.  What is a cast?

P R O B L E M   S E T

1.  When might you want the compiler to ignore type differences in an 

expression?

2.  State your own arguments for and against allowing mixed-mode arithmetic 

expressions.

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   325

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
326 

  Chapter 7  

 Expressions and  Assignment Statements

3.  Do you think the elimination of overloaded operators in your favorite 

language would be beneficial? Why or why not?

4.  Would it be a good idea to eliminate all operator precedence rules and 

require parentheses to show the desired precedence in expressions? Why 
or why not?

5.  Should C’s assigning operations (for example,  + = ) be included in other 

languages (that do not already have them)? Why or why not?

6.  Should C’s single-operand assignment forms (for example, ++count) be 
included in other languages (that do not already have them)? Why or 
why not?

7.  Describe a situation in which the add operator in a programming 

language would not be commutative.

8.  Describe a situation in which the add operator in a programming 

language would not be associative.

9.  Assume the following rules of associativity and precedence for expressions:

Precedence

Highest

Associativity

Lowest

Left to right

*, /, not
+,  -, &, mod
- (unary)
=, / =, 6 , 6 =, 7 =, 7
and

or, xor

Show the order of evaluation of the following expressions by 
parenthesizing all subexpressions and placing a superscript on the right 
parenthesis to indicate order. For example, for the expression

a + b * c + d

the order of evaluation would be represented as

((a + (b * c)1)2  + d)3 

a.  a * b - 1 + c
b.  a * (b - 1) / c mod d
c.  (a - b) / c & (d * e / a - 3)
d.  -a or c = d and e
e.  a > b xor c or d <= 17
f.  -a + b

10.  Show the order of evaluation of the expressions of Problem 9, 

assuming that there are no precedence rules and all operators associate 
right to left.

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   326

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
Problem Set 

  327

11.  Write a BNF description of the precedence and associativity rules 

defined for the expressions in Problem 9. Assume the only operands are 
the names a,b,c,d, and e.

12.  Using the grammar of Problem 11, draw parse trees for the expressions 

of Problem 9.

13.  Let the function fun be defined as

int fun(int* k) {
 *k += 4;
 return 3 * (*k) - 1;
 }

Suppose fun is used in a program as follows:

void  main() {
  int i = 10, j = 10, sum1, sum2;
  sum1 = (i / 2) + fun(&i);
  sum2 = fun(&j) + (j / 2);
}

What are the values of sum1 and sum2

a.  operands in the expressions are evaluated left to right?
b.  operands in the expressions are evaluated right to left?

14.  What is your primary argument against (or for) the operator precedence 

rules of APL?

15.  Explain why it is difficult to eliminate functional side effects in C.

16.  For some language of your choice, make up a list of operator symbols 

that could be used to eliminate all operator overloading.

17.  Determine whether the narrowing explicit type conversions in two 

languages you know provide error messages when a converted value loses 
its usefulness.

18.  Should an optimizing compiler for C or C++ be allowed to 

change the order of subexpressions in a Boolean expression? Why or 
why not?

19.  Consider the following C program:

int fun(int *i) {
  *i += 5;
  return  4;
}
void main() {
  int x = 3;
  x = x + fun(&x);
  }

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   327

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
328 

  Chapter 7  

 Expressions and  Assignment Statements

What is the value of x after the assignment statement in main, assuming

a.  operands are evaluated left to right.

b.  operands are evaluated right to left.

20.  Why does Java specify that operands in expressions are all evaluated in 

left-to-right order?

21.  Explain how the coercion rules of a language affect its error detection.

P R O G R A M M I N G   E X E R C I S E S

1.  Run the code given in Problem 13 (in the Problem Set) on some system 
that supports C to determine the values of sum1 and sum2. Explain the 
results.

2.  Rewrite the program of Programming Exercise 1 in C++, Java, and C#, 

run them, and compare the results.

3.  Write a test program in your favorite language that determines and 

outputs the precedence and associativity of its arithmetic and Boolean 
operators.

4.  Write a Java program that exposes Java’s rule for operand evaluation 

order when one of the operands is a method call.

5.  Repeat Programming Exercise 4 with C++.

6.  Repeat Programming Exercise 4 with C#.

7.  Write a program in either C++, Java, or C# that illustrates the order of 

evaluation of expressions used as actual parameters to a method.

8.  Write a C program that has the following statements:

int  a, b;
a = 10;
b = a + fun();
printf("With the function call on the right, ");
printf(" b is: %d\n", b);
a = 10;
b = fun() + a;
printf("With the function call on the left, ");
printf(" b is: %d\n", b);

and define fun to add 10 to a. Explain the results.

9.  Write a program in either Java, C++, or C# that performs a large number 
of f loating-point operations and an equal number of integer operations 
and compare the time required.

M07_SEBE8029_12_SE_C07.indd   328

1/5/18   10:43 PM

 
 
 
 
8 

Statement-Level  
Control Structures

  8.1  Introduction

  8.2  Selection Statements

  8.3  Iterative Statements

  8.4  Unconditional Branching

  8.5  Guarded Commands

  8.6  Conclusions

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   329

1/5/18   10:45 PM

329

330 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

T he flow of control, or execution sequence, in a program can be examined at 

several levels. In Chapter 7, the flow of control within expressions, which is 
 governed by operator associativity and precedence rules, was discussed. At 
the highest level is the flow of control among program units, which is discussed in 
 Chapters 9 and 13. Between these two extremes is the important issue of the flow of 
control among statements, which is the subject of this chapter.

We begin by giving an overview of the evolution of control statements. This topic 

is followed by a thorough examination of selection statements, both those for two-way 
and those for multiple selection. Next, we discuss the variety of looping statements 
that have been developed and used in programming languages. Next, we take a brief 
look at the problems associated with unconditional branch statements. Finally, we 
describe the guarded command control statements.

8.1  Introduction

Computations in imperative-language programs are accomplished by evaluat-
ing expressions and assigning the resulting values to variables. However, there 
are few useful programs that consist entirely of assignment statements. At least 
two additional linguistic mechanisms are necessary to make the computations 
in programs f lexible and powerful: some means of selecting among alternative 
control f low paths (of statement execution) and some means of causing the 
repeated execution of statements or sequences of statements. Statements that 
provide these kinds of capabilities are called control statements.

Computations in functional programming languages are accomplished by 
evaluating expressions and applying functions to given parameters. Further-
more, the f low of execution among the expressions and functions is controlled 
by other expressions and functions, although some of them are similar to the 
control statements in the imperative languages.

The  control  statements  of  the  first  successful  programming  language, 
Fortran, were, in effect, designed by the architects of the IBM 704. All were 
directly related to machine language instructions, so their capabilities were 
more the result of instruction design rather than language design. At the time, 
little was known about the difficulty of programming, and, as a result, the 
control statements of Fortran in the mid-1950s were thought to be entirely 
adequate. By today’s standards, however, they are considered seriously lacking.
A great deal of research and discussion was devoted to control statements 
in the 10 years between the mid-1960s and the mid-1970s. One of the pri-
mary conclusions of these efforts was that, although a single control state-
ment (a selectable goto) is minimally sufficient, a language that is designed not 
to include a goto needs only a small number of different control statements. 
In fact, it was proven that all algorithms that can be expressed by f lowcharts 
can be coded in a programming language with only two control statements: 
one for choosing between two control f low paths and one for logically con-
trolled iterations (Böhm and Jacopini, 1966). An important result of this is 
that the unconditional branch statement is superf luous—potentially useful but 

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   330

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
8.1 

Introduction 

  331

nonessential. This fact, combined with the practical problems of using uncon-
ditional branches, or gotos, led to a great deal of debate about the goto, as will 
be discussed in Section 8.4.

Programmers care less about the results of theoretical research on control 
statements than they do about writability and readability. All languages that 
have been widely used include more control statements than the two that are 
minimally required, because writability is enhanced by a larger number and 
wider variety of control statements. For example, rather than requiring the 
use of a logically controlled loop statement for all loops, it is easier to write 
programs when a counter-controlled loop statement can be used to build loops 
that are naturally controlled by a counter. The primary factor that restricts the 
number of control statements in a language is readability, because the presence 
of a large number of statement forms demands that program readers learn a 
larger language. Recall that few people learn all of the statements of a relatively 
large language; instead, they learn the subset they choose to use, which is often 
a different subset from that used by the programmer who wrote the program 
they are trying to read. On the other hand, too few control statements can 
require the use of lower-level statements, such as the goto, which also makes 
programs less readable.

The question as to the best collection of control statements to provide the 
required capabilities and the desired writability has been widely debated. It is 
essentially a question of how much a language should be expanded to increase 
its writability at the expense of its simplicity, size, and readability.

A control structure is a control statement and the collection of statements 

whose execution it controls.

There is only one design issue that is relevant to all of the selection and 
iteration  control  statements:  Should  the  control  structure  have  multiple 
entries? All selection and iteration constructs control the execution of code 
segments, and the question is whether the execution of those code segments 
always  begins  with  the  first  statement  in  the  segment.  It  is  now  generally 
believed that multiple entries add little to the f lexibility of a control state-
ment, relative to the decrease in readability caused by the increased complexity. 
Note that multiple entries are possible only in languages that include gotos 
and statement labels.

At this point, the reader might wonder why multiple exits from control 
structures are not considered a design issue. The reason is that all program-
ming languages allow some form of multiple exits from control structures, the 
rationale being as follows: If all exits from a control structure are restricted to 
transferring control to the first statement following the structure, where con-
trol would f low if the control structure had no explicit exit, there is no harm 
to readability and also no danger. However, if an exit can have an unrestricted 
target and therefore can result in a transfer of control to anywhere in the pro-
gram unit that contains the control structure, the harm to readability is the 
same as for a goto statement anywhere else in a program. Languages that have 
a goto statement allow it to appear anywhere, including in a control structure. 
Therefore, the issue is the inclusion of a goto, not whether multiple exits from 
control expressions are allowed.

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   331

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
332 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

8.2  Selection Statements

A selection statement provides the means of choosing between two or more 
execution paths in a program. Such statements are fundamental and essential 
parts of all programming languages, as was proven by Böhm and Jacopini.

Selection statements fall into two general categories: two-way and n-way, or 
multiple selection. Two-way selection statements are discussed in  Section 8.2.1; 
multiple-selection statements are covered in Section 8.2.2.

8.2.1  Two-Way Selection Statements

Although the two-way selection statements of contemporary imperative lan-
guages are quite similar, there are some variations in their designs. The general 
form of a two-way selector is as follows:

if control_expression
     then clause
     else clause

8.2.1.1  Design Issues

The design issues for two-way selectors can be summarized as follows:

•  What is the form and type of the expression that controls the selection?

•  How are the then and else clauses specified?

•  How should the meaning of nested selectors be specified?

8.2.1.2  The Control Expression

Control expressions are specified in parentheses if the then reserved word (or 
some other syntactic marker) is not used to introduce the then clause. In those 
cases where the then reserved word (or alternative marker) is used, there is less 
need for the parentheses, so they are often omitted, as in Ruby.

In C89, which did not have a Boolean data type, arithmetic expressions 
were used as control expressions. This can also be done in Python, C99, and 
C++. However, in those languages either arithmetic or Boolean expressions 
can be used. In other contemporary languages, only Boolean expressions can 
be used for control expressions.

8.2.1.3  Clause Form

In many languages, the then and else clauses appear as either single statements 
or compound statements. One variation of this is Perl, in which all then and 
else clauses must be compound statements, even if they have only one state-
ment. Many languages use braces to form compound statements, which serve 

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   332

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
8.2  Selection Statements 

  333

as the bodies of then and else clauses. In Python and Ruby, the then and else 
clauses are statement sequences, rather than compound statements. The com-
plete selection statement is terminated in these languages with a reserved word.
Python uses indentation to specify compound statements. For example,

if x > y :
  x = y
  print "case 1"

All statements equally indented are included in the compound statement.1 
Notice that rather than then, a colon is used to introduce the then clause in 
Python.

The variations in clause form have implications for the specification of the 

meaning of nested selectors, as discussed in the next subsection.

8.2.1.4  Nesting Selectors

Recall that in Chapter 3, we discussed the problem of syntactic ambiguity of a 
straightforward grammar for a two-way selector statement. That ambiguous 
grammar was as follows:

<if_stmt> S if <logic_expr> then <stmt>
                      | if <logic_expr> then <stmt> else <stmt>

The issue is that when a selection statement is nested in the then clause of 
a selection statement, it is not clear with which if an else clause should be 
associated. This problem is ref lected in the semantics of selection statements. 
Consider the following Java-like code:

if (sum == 0)
  if (count == 0)
    result = 0;
else
    result = 1;

This statement can be interpreted in two different ways, depending on whether 
the else clause is matched with the first then clause or the second. Notice that 
the indentation seems to indicate that the else clause belongs with the first then 
clause. However, with the exceptions of Python and F#, indentation has no 
effect on semantics in contemporary languages and is therefore ignored by their 
compilers.

The crux of the problem in this example is that the else clause follows two 
then clauses with no intervening else clause, and there is no syntactic indicator 
to specify a matching of the else clause to one of the then clauses. In Java, as in 

1.  The statement following the compound statement must have the same indentation as the if.

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   333

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
334 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

many other imperative languages, the static semantics of the language specify 
that the else clause is always paired with the nearest previous unpaired then 
clause. A static semantics rule, rather than a syntactic entity, is used to provide 
the disambiguation. So, in the example, the else clause would be paired with the 
second then clause. The disadvantage of using a rule rather than some syntactic 
entity is that although the programmer may have meant the else clause to be the 
alternative to the first then clause and the compiler found the structure syntac-
tically correct, its semantics is the opposite. To force the alternative semantics 
in Java, the inner if is put in a compound, as in

if (sum == 0) {
  if (count == 0)
    result = 0;
}
else
    result = 1;

C, C++, and C# have the same problem as Java with selection statement 
nesting. Because Perl requires that all then and else clauses be compound, it 
does not. In Perl, the previous code would be written as follows:

if (sum == 0) {
  if (count == 0) {
    result = 0;
  }
} else {
    result = 1;
}

If the alternative semantics were needed, it would be

if (sum == 0) {
  if (count == 0) {
    result = 0;
  }
  else {
    result = 1;
  }
}

Another way to avoid the issue of nested selection statements is to use an alter-
native means of forming compound statements. Consider the syntactic structure 
of the Java if statement. The then clause follows the control expression and the 
else clause is introduced by the reserved word else. When the then clause is a 
single statement and the else clause is present, although there is no need to mark 
the end, the else reserved word in fact marks the end of the then clause. When 
the then clause is a compound, it is terminated by a right brace. However, if the 
last clause in an if, whether then or else, is not a compound, there is no syntactic 

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   334

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
8.2  Selection Statements 

  335

entity to mark the end of the whole selection statement. The use of a special 
word for this purpose resolves the question of the semantics of nested selectors 
and also adds to the readability of the statement. This is the design of the selec-
tion statement in Ruby. For example, consider the following Ruby statement:

if a > b then sum = sum + a
  acount = acount + 1
else sum = sum + b
  bcount = bcount + 1
end 

The design of this statement is more regular than that of the selection state-
ments of the C-based languages, because the form is the same regardless of the 
number of statements in the then and else clauses. (This is also true for Perl.) 
Recall that in Ruby, the then and else clauses consist of statement sequences 
rather  than  compound  statements.  The  first  interpretation  of  the  selector 
example at the beginning of this section, in which the else clause is matched to 
the nested if, can be written in Ruby as follows:

if sum == 0  then
  if count == 0 then
    result = 0
  else
    result = 1
  end
end 

Because the end reserved word closes the nested if, it is clear that the else 
clause is matched to the inner then clause.

The second interpretation of the selection statement at the beginning of 
this section, in which the else clause is matched to the outer if, can be written 
in Ruby as follows:

if sum == 0 then
  if count == 0 then
    result = 0
  end
else
    result = 1
 end 

The following statement, written in Python, is semantically equivalent to the 
last Ruby statement above:

if sum == 0 :
  if count == 0 :
    result = 0
else:
  result = 1

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   335

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
336 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

If the line else: were indented to begin in the same column as the nested 

if, the else clause would be matched with the inner if.

ML does not have a problem with nested selectors because it does not 

allow else-less if statements.

8.2.1.5  Selector Expressions

In the functional languages ML, F#, and LISP, the selector is not a statement; it is 
an expression that results in a value. Therefore, it can appear anywhere any other 
expression can appear. Consider the following example selector written in F#:

let y =
    if x > 0 then  x
    else 2 * x;;

This creates the name y and sets it to either x or 2 * x, depending on whether 
x is greater than zero.

In F#, the type of the value returned by the then clause of an if construct 
must be the same as that of the value returned by its else clause. If there is no 
else clause, the then clause cannot return a value of a normal type. In this case, 
it can only return a unit type, which is a special type that means no value.  
A unit type is represented in code as ().

8.2.2  Multiple-Selection Statements

The multiple-selection statement allows the selection of one of any number 
of statements or statement groups. It is, therefore, a generalization of a selector. 
In fact, two-way selectors can be built with a multiple selector.

The need to choose from among more than two control paths in programs 
is common. Although a multiple selector can be built from two-way selectors 
and gotos, the resulting structures are cumbersome, unreliable, and difficult to 
write and read. Therefore, the need for a special structure is clear.

8.2.2.1  Design Issues

Some of the design issues for multiple selectors are similar to some of those 
for two-way selectors. For example, one issue is the question of the type of 
expression on which the selector is based. In this case, the range of possibilities 
is larger, in part because the number of possible selections is larger. A two-way 
selector needs an expression with only two possible values. Another issue is 
whether single statements, compound statements, or statement sequences may 
be selected. Next, there is the question of whether only a single selectable seg-
ment can be executed when the statement is executed. This is not an issue for 
two-way selectors, because they always allow only one of the clauses to be on a 
control path during one execution. As we shall see, the resolution of this issue 
for multiple selectors is a trade-off between reliability and f lexibility. Another 

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   336

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
8.2  Selection Statements 

  337

issue is the form of the case value specifications. Finally, there is the issue of 
what should result from the selector expression evaluating to a value that does 
not select one of the segments. (Such a value would be unrepresented among 
the selectable segments.) The choice here is between simply disallowing the 
situation from arising and having the statement do nothing at all when it does 
arise.

The following is a summary of these design issues:

•  What is the form and type of the expression that controls the selection?

•  How are the selectable segments specified?

•  Is execution f low through the structure restricted to include just a single 

selectable segment?

•  How are the case values specified?

•  How should unrepresented selector expression values be handled, if at all?

8.2.2.2  Examples of Multiple Selectors

The C multiple-selector statement, switch, which is also part of C++, Java, 
and JavaScript, is a relatively primitive design. Its general form is

switch (expression) {
  case constant_expression1:statement1;
  . . .
  case constantn: statement_n;
  [default: statementn + 1]
}

where the control expression and the constant expressions are some discrete 
type. This includes integer types, as well as characters and enumeration types. 
The selectable statements can be statement sequences, compound statements, 
or blocks. The optional default segment is for unrepresented values of the 
control expression. If the value of the control expression is not represented and 
no default segment is present, then the statement does nothing.

The switch statement does not provide implicit branches at the end of its 
code segments. This allows control to f low through more than one selectable 
code segment on a single execution. Consider the following example:

switch  (index) {
   case  1:
   case  3: odd += 1;
          sumodd += index;
   case  2:
   case  4: even += 1;
          sumeven += index;
   default: printf("Error in switch, index = %d\n", index);
}

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   337

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
338 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

This code prints the error message on every execution. Likewise, the code for 
the 2 and 4 constants is executed every time the code at the 1 or 3 constants 
is executed. To separate these segments logically, an explicit branch must be 
included. The break statement, which is actually a restricted goto, is normally 
used for exiting switch statements. break transfers control to the first state-
ment after the compound statement in which it appears.

The following switch statement uses break to restrict each execution to 

a single selectable segment:

switch (index) {
  case 1:
  case 3: odd += 1;
          sumodd += index;
          break;
  case 2:
  case 4: even += 1;
          sumeven += index;
          break;
  default: printf("Error in switch, index = %d\n", index);
}

Occasionally, it is convenient to allow control to f low from one selectable 
code segment to another. For example, in the example above, the segments for 
the case values 1 and 2 are empty, allowing control to f low to the segments for 
3 and 4, respectively. This is the reason why there are no implicit branches in 
the switch statement. The reliability problem with this design arises when 
the mistaken absence of a break statement in a segment allows control to 
f low to the next segment incorrectly. The designers of C’s  switch traded 
a decrease in reliability for an increase in f lexibility. Studies have shown, 
however, that the ability to have control f low from one selectable segment 
to another is rarely used. C’s switch is modeled on the multiple-selection 
statement in ALGOL 68, which also does not have implicit branches from 
selectable segments.

The C switch statement has virtually no restrictions on the placement of 
the case expressions, which are treated as if they were normal statement labels. 
This laxness can result in highly complex structure within the switch body. The 
following example is taken from Harbison and Steele (2002).

switch (x)
  default:
  if (prime(x))
    case 2: case 3: case 5: case 7:
      process_prime(x);
  else
     case 4: case 6: case 8: case 9: case 10:
       process_composite(x);

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   338

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
8.2  Selection Statements 

  339

This code may appear to have diabolically complex form, but it was designed 
for a real problem and works correctly and efficiently to solve that problem.2
The Java switch prevents this sort of complexity by disallowing case expres-
sions from appearing anywhere except the top level of the body of the switch.
The C# switch statement differs from that of its C-based predecessors in 
two ways. First, C# has a static semantics rule that disallows the implicit execu-
tion of more than one segment. The rule is that every selectable segment must 
end with an explicit unconditional branch statement: either a break, which 
transfers control out of the switch statement, or a goto, which can transfer con-
trol to one of the selectable segments (or virtually anywhere else). For example,

switch (value) {
   case -1:
      Negatives++;
      break;
   case 0:
      Zeros++;
      goto case 1;
   case 1:
      Positives++;
   default:
      Console.WriteLine("Error in switch \n");
}

Note that Console.WriteLine is the method for displaying strings in C#.

The other way C#’s switch differs from that of its predecessors is that the 

control expression and the case statements can be strings in C#.

PHP’s switch uses the syntax of C’s switch but allows more type f lex-
ibility. The case values can be any of the PHP scalar types—string, integer, 
or double precision. As with C, if there is no break at the end of the selected 
segment, execution continues into the next segment.

Ruby has two forms of multiple-selection constructs, both of which are 
called case expressions and both of which yield the value of the last expression 
evaluated. The only version of Ruby’s case expressions that is described here is 
semantically similar to a list of nested if statements:

case
when Boolean_expression then expression
. . .
when Boolean_expression then expression
[else expression]
end 

2.  The problem is to call process_prime when x is prime and process_composite 
when x is not prime. The design of the switch body resulted from an attempt to optimize 
based on the knowledge that x was most often in the range of 1 to 10.

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   339

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
340 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

The semantics of this case expression is that the Boolean expressions are eval-
uated one at a time, top to bottom. The value of the case expression is the 
value of the first then expression whose Boolean expression is true. The else 
represents true in this statement, and the else clause is optional. For example,3

leap = case
       when year % 400 == 0 then true
       when year % 100 == 0 then false
       else year % 4 == 0
       end 

This case expression evaluates to true if year is a leap year.

The other Ruby case expression form is similar to the switch of Java. Perl 

and Python do not have multiple-selection statements.

8.2.2.3  Implementing Multiple Selection Structures

A multiple selection statement is essentially an n-way branch to segments of 
code, where n is the number of selectable segments. Implementing such a state-
ment must be done with multiple conditional branch instructions. Consider 
again the general form of the C switch statement, with breaks:

switch (expression) {
  case constant_expression1: statement1;
    break;
  . . .
  case constantn: statementn;
    break;
  [default: statementn + 1]
}

One simple translation of this statement follows:

Code to evaluate expression into t
goto branches
label1  : code for statement1
                  goto out
 . . . 
labeln  : code for statementn
                  goto out
default: code for statementn + 1
                  goto out
branches: if t = constant_expression1 goto label1
                   . . . 
                   if t = constant_expressionn goto labeln
                   goto default
out:

3.  This example is from Thomas et al. (2013).

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   340

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
 
8.2  Selection Statements 

  341

The code for the selectable segments precedes the branches so that the targets 
of the branches are all known when the branches are generated. An alternative 
to these coded conditional branches is to put the case values and labels in a table 
and use a linear search with a loop to find the correct label. This requires less 
space than the coded conditionals.

The use of conditional branches or a linear search on a table of cases and 
labels is a simple but inefficient approach that is acceptable when the number of 
cases is small, say less than 10. It takes an average of about half as many tests as 
there are cases to find the right one. For the default case to be chosen, all other 
cases must be tested. In statements with 10 or more cases, the low efficiency of 
this form is not justified by its simplicity.

When the number of cases is 10 or greater, the compiler can build a hash 
table of the segment labels, which would result in approximately equal (and 
short) times to choose any of the selectable segments. If the language allows 
ranges of values for case expressions, as in Ruby, the hash method is not suit-
able. For these situations, a binary search table of case values and segment 
addresses is better.

If the range of the case values is relatively small and more than half of the 
whole range of values is represented, an array whose indices are the case values 
and whose values are the segment labels can be built. Array elements whose 
indices are not among the represented case values are filled with the default 
segment’s label. Then finding the correct segment label is found by array index-
ing, which is very fast.

Of course, choosing among these approaches is an additional burden on 
the compiler. In many compilers, only two different methods are used. As in 
other situations, determining and using the most efficient method costs more 
compiler time.

8.2.2.4  Multiple Selection Using if

In many situations, a switch or case statement is inadequate for multiple 
selection (Ruby’s case is an exception). For example, when selections must be 
made on the basis of a Boolean expression rather than some ordinal type, nested 
two-way selectors can be used to simulate a multiple selector. To alleviate the 
poor readability of deeply nested two-way selectors, some languages, such as 
Perl and Python, have been extended specifically for this use. The extension 
allows some of the special words to be left out. In particular, else-if sequences 
are replaced with a single special word, and the closing special word on the 
nested if is dropped. The nested selector is then called an else-if clause. 
Consider the following Python selector statement (note that else-if is spelled 
elif in Python):

if  count < 10 :
  bag1 = True
elif count < 100 :
  bag2 = True
elif count < 1000 :
  bag3 = True

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   341

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
342 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

which is equivalent to the following:

if count < 10 :
  bag1 = True
else :
  if count < 100 :
    bag2 = True
  else :
    if count < 1000 :
      bag3 = True
    else :
      bag4 = True

The else-if version (the first) is the more readable of the two. Notice that this 
example is not easily simulated with a switch statement, because each select-
able statement is chosen on the basis of a Boolean expression. Therefore, the 
else-if statement is not a redundant form of switch. In fact, none of the mul-
tiple selectors in contemporary languages are as general as the if-then-else-if 
 statement. An operational semantics description of a general selector statement 
with else-if clauses, in which the E’s are logic expressions and the S’s are state-
ments, is given here:

    if E1 goto 1
    if E2 goto 2
    . . .
1: S1
   goto out
2: S2
   goto out
. . .

out: . . .

From this description, we can see the difference between multiple selection 
structures and else-if statements: In a multiple selection statement, all the E’s 
would be restricted to comparisons between the value of a single expression 
and some other values.

Languages that do not include the else-if statement can use the same con-

trol structure, with only slightly more typing.

The Python example if-then-else-if statement above can be written as the 

Ruby case statement:

case
when count < 10 then bag1 = true
when count < 100 then bag2 = true
when count < 1000 then bag3 = true
end 

Else-if statements are based on the common mathematics statement, the 

conditional expression.

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   342

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
8.3 

Iterative Statements 

  343

The Scheme multiple selector, which is based on mathematical condi-
tional expressions, is a special form function named COND. COND is a slightly 
generalized  version  of  the  mathematical  conditional  expression;  it  allows 
more than one predicate to be true at the same time. Because different math-
ematical conditional expressions have different numbers of parameters, COND 
does not require a fixed number of actual parameters. Each parameter to 
COND is a pair of expressions in which the first is a predicate (it evaluates to 
either #T or #F).

The general form of COND is

  (COND
    (predicate1  expression1)
    (predicate2  expression2)
    . . .
    (predicaten  expressionn)
    [(ELSE expressionn + 1)]
)

where the ELSE clause is optional.

The semantics of COND is as follows: The predicates of the parameters are 
evaluated one at a time, in order from the first, until one evaluates to #T. The 
expression that follows the first predicate that is found to be #T is then evalu-
ated and its value is returned as the value of COND. If none of the predicates is 
true and there is an ELSE, its expression is evaluated and the value is returned. 
If none of the predicates is true and there is no  ELSE, the value of COND is 
unspecified. Therefore, all CONDs should include an ELSE.

Consider the following example call to COND:

  (COND
    ((> x y) "x is greater than y")
    ((< x y) "y is greater than x")
    (ELSE "x and y are equal")
  )

Note that string literals evaluate to themselves, so that when this call to COND 
is evaluated, it produces a string result.

8.3  Iterative Statements

An iterative statement is one that causes a statement or collection of state-
ments to be executed zero, one, or more times. An iterative statement is often 
called a loop. Every programming language from Plankalkül on has included 
some method of repeating the execution of segments of code. Iteration is the 
very essence of the power of the computer. If some means of repetitive execu-
tion of a statement or collection of statements were not possible, programmers 
would be required to state every action in sequence; useful programs would be 

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   343

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
344 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

huge and inf lexible and take unacceptably large amounts of time to write and 
mammoth amounts of memory to store.

The first iterative statements in programming languages were directly 
related to arrays. This resulted from the fact that in the earliest years of com-
puters, computing was largely numerical in nature, frequently using loops to 
process data in arrays.

Several categories of iteration control statements have been developed. 
The  primary  categories  are  defined  by  how  designers  answered  two  basic 
design questions:

•  How is the iteration controlled?

•  Where should the control mechanism appear in the loop statement?

The primary possibilities for iteration control are logical, counting, or a 
combination of the two. The main choices for the location of the control mech-
anism are the top of the loop or the bottom of the loop. Top and bottom here 
are logical, rather than physical, denotations. The issue is not the physical place-
ment of the control mechanism; rather, it is whether the mechanism is executed 
and affects control before or after execution of the statement’s body. A third 
option, which allows the user to decide where to put the control, at the top, at 
the bottom, or even within the controlled segment, is discussed in Section 8.3.3.
The body of an iterative statement is the collection of statements whose 
execution is controlled by the iteration statement. We use the term pretest 
to mean that the test for loop completion occurs before the loop body is exe-
cuted and posttest to mean that it occurs after the loop body is executed. The 
iteration statement and the associated loop body together form an iteration 
statement.

8.3.1  Counter-Controlled Loops

A counting iterative control statement has a variable, called the loop variable, 
in which the count value is maintained. It also includes some means of spec-
ifying the initial and terminal values of the loop variable, and the difference 
between sequential loop variable values, often called the stepsize. The initial, 
terminal, and stepsize specifications of a loop are called the loop parameters.
Although  logically  controlled  loops  are  more  general  than  counter- 
controlled  loops,  they  are  not  necessarily  more  commonly  used.  Because 
 counter-controlled loops are more complex, their design is more demanding.
Counter-controlled loops are sometimes supported by machine instruc-
tions designed for that purpose. Unfortunately, machine architecture can out-
live the prevailing approaches to programming at the time of the architecture 
design. For example, VAX computers have a very convenient instruction for the 
implementation of posttest counter-controlled loops, which Fortran had at the 
time of the design of the VAX (mid-1970s). But Fortran no longer had such a 
loop by the time VAX computers became widely used (it had been replaced by 
a pretest loop). Furthermore, no other widely used language of the time had a 
posttest counting loop.

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   344

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
8.3 

Iterative Statements 

  345

8.3.1.1  Design Issues

There are many design issues for iterative counter-controlled statements. The 
nature of the loop variable and the loop parameters provide a number of design 
issues. The type of the loop variable and that of the loop parameters obviously 
should be the same or at least compatible, but what types should be allowed? 
One apparent choice is integer, but what about enumeration, character, and 
f loating-point types? Another question is whether the loop variable is a nor-
mal variable, in terms of scope, or whether it should have some special scope. 
Allowing the user to change the loop variable or the loop parameters within the 
loop can lead to code that is very difficult to understand, so another question is 
whether the additional f lexibility that might be gained by allowing such changes 
is worth that additional complexity. A similar question arises about the number 
of times and the specific time when the loop parameters are evaluated: If they are 
evaluated just once, loops are simple but less f lexible. Finally, what is the value 
of the loop variable after loop termination, if its scope extends beyond the loop?

The following is a summary of these design issues:

•  What are the type and scope of the loop variable?
•  Should it be legal for the loop variable or loop parameters to be changed 

in the loop, and if so, does the change affect loop control?

•  Should  the  loop  parameters  be  evaluated  only  once,  or  once  for  every 

iteration?

•  What is the value of the loop variable after loop termination?

The issue of the value of the loop variable after loop termination is solved 
in some languages, such as Fortran 90, by making the loop variable undefined 
after loop termination. Other languages, such as Ada, make the scope of the 
loop variable the loop itself.

8.3.1.2  The for Statement of the C-Based Languages

The general form of C’s for statement is

for (expression_1; expression_2; expression_3)
  loop body

The loop body can be a single statement, a compound statement, or a null 
statement.

Because assignment statements in C produce results and thus can be con-
sidered expressions, the expressions in a for statement are often assignment 
statements. The first expression is for initialization and is evaluated only once, 
when the for statement execution begins. The second expression is the loop 
control and is evaluated before each execution of the loop body. As is usual in 
C, a zero value means false and all nonzero values mean true. Therefore, if the 
value of the second expression is zero, the for is terminated; otherwise, the 
loop body statements are executed. In C99, the expression also could be a Bool-
ean type. A C99 Boolean type stores only the values 0 or 1. The last expression 

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   345

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
346 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

in the for is executed after each execution of the loop body. It is often used 
to increment the loop counter. An operational semantics description of the C 
for statement is shown next. Because C expressions can be used as statements, 
expression evaluations are shown as statements.

        expression_1
loop:
        if expression_2 = 0 goto out
        [loop body]
        expression_3
        goto loop
out: . . .

Following is an example of a skeletal C for statement:

for (count = 1; count <= 10; count++)
  . . .
}

All of the expressions of C’s for are optional. An absent second expression is 
considered true, so a for without one is potentially an infinite loop. If the first 
and/or third expressions are absent, no assumptions are made. For example, if 
the first expression is absent, it simply means that no initialization takes place.
Note that C’s for need not count. It can easily model counting and logical 

loop structures, as demonstrated in the next section.

The C for design choices are the following: There is no explicit loop vari-
able and no loop parameters. All involved variables can be changed in the loop 
body. The expressions are evaluated in the order stated previously. Although it 
can create havoc, it is legal to branch into a C for loop body.

C’s for is one of the most f lexible, because each of the expressions can 
comprise multiple expressions, which in turn allow multiple loop variables that 
can be of any type. When multiple expressions are used in a single expression 
of a for statement, they are separated by commas. All C statements have val-
ues, and this form of multiple expression is no exception. The value of such a 
multiple expression is the value of the last component.

Consider the following for statement:

for (count1 = 0, count2 = 1.0;
    count1 <= 10 && count2 <= 100.0;
    sum = ++count1 + count2, count2 *= 2.5);

The operational semantics description of this is

        count1 = 0
        count2 = 1.0
loop:
        if count1 > 10 goto out
        if count2 > 100.0 goto out

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   346

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
8.3 

Iterative Statements 

  347

        count1 = count1 + 1
        sum = count1 + count2
        count2 = count2 * 2.5
        goto loop
out: . . . 

The example C for statement does not need and thus does not have a loop 
body. All the desired actions are part of the for statement itself, rather than 
in its body. The first and third expressions are multiple statements. In both of 
these cases, the whole expression is evaluated, but the resulting value is not 
used in the loop control.

The for statement of C99 and C++ differs from that of earlier versions 
of C in two ways. First, in addition to an arithmetic expression, it can use a 
Boolean expression for loop control. Second, the first expression can include 
variable definitions. For example,

for (int count = 0; count < len; count++) { . . . }

The scope of a variable defined in the for statement is from its definition to 
the end of the loop body.

The for statement of Java and C# is like that of C++, except that the loop 

control expression is restricted to boolean.

In all of the C-based languages, the last two loop parameters are evaluated 
with every iteration. Furthermore, variables that appear in the loop parameter 
expression can be changed in the loop body. Therefore, these loops can be 
complex and potentially unreliable.

8.3.1.3  The for Statement of Python

The general form of Python’s for is

for loop_variable in object:
  - loop body
[else:
  - else clause]

The loop variable is assigned the value in the object, which is often a range, one 
for each execution of the loop body. After loop termination, the loop variable 
has the value last assigned to it. The loop variable can be changed in the loop 
body, but such a change has no effect on loop operation. The else clause, when 
present, is executed if the loop terminates normally.

Consider the following example:

for count in [2, 4, 6]:
   print count

produces

2
4
6

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   347

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
348 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

For most simple counting loops in Python, the range function is used. 
range takes one, two, or three parameters. The following examples demon-
strate the actions of range:

range(5) returns [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]
range(2, 7) returns [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
range(0, 8, 2) returns [0, 2, 4, 6]

Note that range never returns the highest value in a given parameter range.

8.3.1.4  Counter-Controlled Loops in Functional Languages

Counter-controlled loops in imperative languages use a counter variable, but 
such variables do not exist in pure functional languages. Rather than iteration 
to control repetition, functional languages use recursion. Rather than a state-
ment, functional languages use a recursive function. Counting loops can be 
simulated in functional languages as follows: The counter can be a parameter 
for a function that repeatedly executes the loop body, which can be specified 
in a second function sent to the loop function as a parameter. So, such a loop 
function takes the body function and the number of repetitions as parameters.
The general form of an F# function for simulating counting loops, named 

forLoop in this case, is as follows:

let rec forLoop loopBody reps =
    if reps <= 0  then 
        ()
    else
         loopBody()
         forLoop loopBody, (reps - 1);;

In this function, the parameter loopBody is the function with the body of the 
loop and the parameter reps is the number of repetitions. The reserved word 
rec appears before the name of the function to indicate that it is recursive. The 
empty parentheses do nothing; they are there because in F# an empty statement 
is illegal and every if must have an else clause.

8.3.2  Logically Controlled Loops

In many cases, collections of statements must be repeatedly executed, but the rep-
etition control is based on a Boolean expression rather than a counter. For these 
situations, a logically controlled loop is convenient. Actually, logically controlled 
loops are more general than counter-controlled loops. Every counting loop can be 
built with a logical loop, but the reverse is not true. Also, recall that only selection 
and logical loops are essential to express the control structure of any f lowchart.

8.3.2.1  Design Issues

Because they are much simpler than counter-controlled loops, logically con-
trolled loops have fewer design issues.

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   348

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
8.3 

Iterative Statements 

  349

•  Should the control be pretest or posttest?

•  Should the logically controlled loop be a special form of a counting loop 

or a separate statement?

8.3.2.2  Examples

The C-based programming languages include both pretest and posttest logically 
controlled loops that are not special forms of their counter-controlled iterative 
statements. The pretest and posttest logical loops have the following forms:

while (control_expression)
   loop body

and

do
   loop body
while (control_expression);

These two statement forms are exemplified by the following C# code segments:

sum = 0;
indat = Int32.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
while (indat >= 0) {
  sum += indat;
  indat = Int32.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
}

value = Int32.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
do {
   value /= 10;
   digits ++;
}  while  (value > 0);

Note that all variables in these examples are integer type. The ReadLine method 
of the Console object gets a line of text from the keyboard. Int32.Parse finds 
the number in its string parameter, converts it to int type, and returns it.

In the pretest version of a logical loop (while), the statement or statement 
segment is executed as long as the expression evaluates to true. In the posttest 
version (do), the loop body is executed until the expression evaluates to false. 
In both cases, the statement can be compound. The operational semantics 
descriptions of those two statements follow:

while

loop:
   if control_expression is false goto out
   [loop body]

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   349

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
350 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

    goto loop
out: . . . 

do-while

loop:
    [loop body]
    if control_expression is true goto loop

It is legal in both C and C++ to branch into both while and do loop bodies. 
The C89 version uses an arithmetic expression for control; in C99 and C++, it 
may be either arithmetic or Boolean.

Java’s while and do statements are similar to those of C and C++, except 
the control expression must be boolean type, and because Java does not have 
a goto, the loop bodies cannot be entered anywhere except at their beginnings.
Posttest loops are infrequently useful and also can be somewhat dangerous, 
in the sense that programmers sometimes forget that the loop body will always 
be executed at least once. The syntactic design of placing a posttest control 
physically after the loop body, where it has its semantic effect, helps avoid such 
problems by making the logic clear.

A pretest logical loop can be simulated in a purely functional form with a 
recursive function that is similar to the one used to simulate a counting loop 
statement in Section 8.3.1.5. In both cases, the loop body is written as a function. 
Following is the general form of a simulated logical pretest loop, written in F#:

let rec whileLoop test body =
    if test() then 
        body()
        whileLoop test body
     else
         ();;

8.3.3  User-Located Loop Control Mechanisms

In some situations, it is convenient for a programmer to choose a location for 
loop control other than the top or bottom of the loop body. As a result, some 
languages provide this capability. A syntactic mechanism for user-located loop 
control can be relatively simple, so its design is not difficult. Such loops have 
the structure of infinite loops but include one or more user-located loop exits. 
Perhaps the most interesting question is whether a single loop or several nested 
loops can be exited. The design issues for such a mechanism are the following:

•  Should the conditional mechanism be an integral part of the exit?
•  Should only one loop body be exited, or can enclosing loops also be exited?

C, C++, Python, Ruby, and C# have unconditional unlabeled exits (break). 

Java and Perl have unconditional labeled exits (break in Java, last in Perl).

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   350

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
8.3 

Iterative Statements 

  351

Following is an example of nested loops in Java, in which there is a break 

out of the outer loop from the nested loop:

outerLoop:
  for (row = 0; row < numRows; row++)
     for  (col = 0; col < numCols; col++) {
       sum += mat[row][col];
       if (sum > 1000.0)
         break outerLoop;
     }

C, C++, and Python include an unlabeled control statement, continue, 
that transfers control to the control mechanism of the smallest enclosing loop. 
This is not an exit but rather a way to skip the rest of the loop statements on 
the current iteration without terminating the loop construct. For example, 
consider the following:

while (sum < 1000) {
  getnext(value);
  if (value < 0) continue;
  sum += value;
}

A negative value causes the assignment statement to be skipped, and control 
is transferred instead to the conditional at the top of the loop. On the other 
hand, in

while (sum < 1000) {
  getnext(value);
  if (value < 0) break;
  sum += value;
}

a negative value terminates the loop.

Both last and break provide for multiple exits from loops, which may 
seem to be somewhat of a hindrance to readability. However, unusual condi-
tions that require loop termination are so common that such a statement is 
justified. Furthermore, readability is not seriously harmed, because the target 
of all such loop exits is the first statement after the loop (or an enclosing loop) 
rather than just anywhere in the program. Finally, the alternative of using mul-
tiple breaks to leave more than one level of loops is even more detrimental to 
readability.

The motivation for user-located loop exits is simple: They fulfill a common 
need for goto statements using a highly restricted branch statement. The target 
of a goto can be many places in the program, both above and below the goto 
itself. However, the targets of user-located loop exits must be below the exit and 
can only follow immediately at the end of a compound statement.

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   351

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
352 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

8.3.4 

Iteration Based on Data Structures

A general data-based iteration statement uses a user-defined data structure and 
a user-defined function (the iterator) to go through the structure’s elements. 
The iterator is called at the beginning of each iteration, and each time it is 
called, the iterator returns an element from a particular data structure in some 
specific order. For example, suppose a program has a user-defined binary tree 
of data nodes, and the data in each node must be processed in some particular 
order. A user-defined iteration statement for the tree would successively set the 
loop variable to point to the nodes in the tree, one for each iteration. The initial 
execution of the user-defined iteration statement needs to issue a special call 
to the iterator to get the first tree element. The iterator must always remem-
ber which node it presented last so that it visits all nodes without visiting any 
node more than once. So an iterator must be history sensitive. A user-defined 
iteration statement terminates when the iterator fails to find more elements.

The for statement of the C-based languages, because of its great f lexi-
bility, can be used to simulate a user-defined iteration statement. Once again, 
suppose the nodes of a binary tree are to be processed. If the tree root is pointed 
to by a variable named root, and if traverse is a function that sets its param-
eter to point to the next element of a tree in the desired order, the following 
could be used:

for (ptr = root; ptr == null; ptr = traverse(ptr)) {
  . . . 
}

In this statement, traverse is the iterator.

User-defined iteration statements are more important in object-oriented 
programming  than  they  were  in  earlier  software  development  paradigms, 
because users of object-oriented programming routinely use abstract data types 
for data structures, especially collections. In such cases, a user-defined iteration 
statement and its iterator must be provided by the author of the data abstraction 
because the representation of the objects of the type is not known to the user.
An enhanced version of the for statement was added to Java in Java 5.0. 
This statement simplifies iterating through the values in an array or objects in 
a collection that implements the Iterable interface. (All of the predefined 
generic collections in Java implement Iterable.) For example, if we had an 
ArrayList4  collection  named  myList  of  strings,  the  following  statement 
would iterate through all of its elements, setting each to myElement:

for  (String myElement : myList) { . . . }

4.  An ArrayList is a predefined generic collection that is actually a dynamic-length array 

of whatever type it is declared to store.

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   352

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
 
8.3 

Iterative Statements 

  353

This new statement is referred to as “foreach,” although its reserved word 

is for.

C#  and  F#  (and  the  other  .NET  languages)  also  have  generic  library 
classes for collections. For example, there are generic collection classes for 
lists, which are dynamic length arrays, stacks, queues, and dictionaries (hash 
table). All of these predefined generic collections have built-in iterators that 
are  used  implicitly  with  the  foreach  statement.  Furthermore,  users  can 
define their own collections and write their own iterators, which can imple-
ment the IEnumerator interface, which enables the use of foreach on these 
collections.

For example, consider the following C# code:

List<String> names =  new  List<String>();
names.Add("Bob");
names.Add("Carol");
names.Add("Alice");
. . . 
foreach  (String name  in  names)
  Console.WriteLine(name);

In Ruby, a block is a sequence of code, delimited by either braces or the 
do and end reserved words. Blocks can be used with specially written methods 
to create many useful constructs, including iterators for data structures. This 
construct consists of a method call followed by a block. A block is actually 
an anonymous method that is sent to the method (whose call precedes it) as 
a parameter. The called method can then call the block, which can produce 
output or objects.

Ruby predefines several iterator methods, such as times and upto for 
counter-controlled loops, and each for simple iterations of arrays and hashes. 
For example, consider the following example of using times:

>> 4.times {puts "Hey!"}
Hey!
Hey!
Hey!
Hey!
=> 4

Note that >> is the prompt of the interactive Ruby interpreter and => is used 
to indicate the return value of the expression. The Ruby puts statement dis-
plays its parameter. In this example, the times method is sent to the object 4, 
with the block sent along as a parameter. The times method calls the block 
four times, producing the four lines of output. The destination object, 4, is the 
return value from times.

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   353

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
354 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

The most common Ruby iterator is each, which is often used to go through 
arrays and apply a block to each element.5 For this purpose, it is convenient to 
allow blocks to have parameters, which, if present, appear at the beginning of 
the block, delimited by vertical bars ((cid:31) ). The following example, which uses a 
block parameter, illustrates the use of each:

>> list = [2, 4, 6, 8]
=> [2, 4, 6, 8]
>> list.each {|value| puts value}
2
4
6
8
=> [2, 4, 6, 8]

In this example, the block is called for each element of the array to which the 
each method is sent. The block produces the output, which is a list of the 
array’s elements. The return value of each is the array to which it is sent.

Instead of a counting loop, Ruby has the upto method. For example, we 

could have the following:

1.upto(5) {|x| print x, " "}

This produces the following output:

1 2 3 4 5

Syntax that resembles a for loop in other languages could also be used, as 

in the following:

for x in 1..5
  print x, " "
end 

Ruby actually has no for statement—constructs like the above are converted 
by Ruby into upto method calls.

Now we consider how blocks work. The yield statement is similar to a 
method call, except that there is no receiver object and the call is a request to 
execute the block attached to the method call, rather than a call to a method. 
yield is only called in a method that has been called with a block. If the block 
has parameters, they are specified in parentheses in the yield statement. The 
value returned by a block is that of the last expression evaluated in the block. It 
is this process that is used to implement the built-in iterators, such as times.

5.  This is similar to the map functions discussed in Chapter 15.

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   354

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
 
8.4  Unconditional Branching 

  355

Python provides strong support for iteration. Suppose one needs to process the 
nodes in some user-defined data structure. Further suppose that the structure 
has a traversal method that goes through the nodes of the structure in the 
desired order. The following skeletal class definition includes such a traversal 
method that produces the nodes of an instance of this class, one at a time.

class MyStructure:
    # Other method definitions, including a constructor

   def traverse(self):
       # if there is another node:
       #    set nod to next node
       # else:
       #    return
       yield nod

The traverse method appears to be a regular Python method, but it contains 
a yield statement, which dramatically changes the semantics of the method. 
In effect, the method is run in a separate thread of control. The yield state-
ment acts like a return. On the first call to traverse, yield returns the initial 
node of the structure. However, on the second call, it returns the second node. 
On all but the first call to traverse, it begins its execution where it left off 
on the previous execution. Instead of restarting at its beginning, it is resumed. 
Any local storage in such a method is maintained across its calls. In the case of 
traverse, subsequent calls begin their execution at the beginning of its code, 
but in the state that it was in its previous execution. In Python, any method 
that contains a yield statement is called a generator, because it generates data 
one element at a time.

Of course, one could also produce all of the nodes of the structure, store 
them in an array, and process them from the array. However, the number of 
nodes could be large, requiring a large array to store them. The approach 
using the iterator is more elegant and is not affected by the size of the data 
structure.

8.4  Unconditional Branching

An unconditional branch statement transfers execution control to a specified 
location in the program. The most heated debate in language design in the late 
1960s was over the issue of whether unconditional branching should be part 
of any high-level language, and if so, whether its use should be restricted. The 
unconditional branch, or goto, is the most powerful statement for controlling 
the f low of execution of a program’s statements. However, careless use of the 
goto can lead to serious problems. The goto has stunning power and great 
f lexibility (all other control structures can be built with goto and a selector), 

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   355

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
356 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

histor y note

Although several thoughtful 
people had pointed out the 
potential problems of gotos ear-
lier, it was Edsger Dijkstra who 
gave the computing world the 
first widely read exposé on the 
dangers of the goto. In his letter 
he noted, “The goto statement 
as it stands is just too primitive; 
it is too much an invitation to 
make a mess of one’s program” 
(Dijkstra, 1968a). During the 
first few years after publication 
of Dijkstra’s views on the goto, 
a large number of people argued 
publicly for either outright ban-
ishment or at least restrictions 
on the use of the goto. Among 
those who did not favor com-
plete elimination was Donald 
Knuth (1974), who argued 
that there were occasions when 
the efficiency of the goto out-
weighed its harm to readability.

but it is this power that makes its use dangerous. Without usage 
restrictions, imposed by either language design or programming 
standards, goto statements can make programs very difficult to 
read, and as a result, highly unreliable and costly to maintain.

These problems follow directly from a goto’s ability to force 
any program statement to follow any other in execution sequence, 
regardless of whether that statement precedes or follows the pre-
viously executed statement in textual order. Readability is best 
when the execution order of statements in a program is nearly 
the same as the order in which they appear—in our case, this 
would mean top to bottom, which is the order to which we are 
accustomed. Thus, restricting gotos so they can transfer control 
only downward in a program partially alleviates the problem. It 
allows gotos to transfer control around code sections in response 
to errors or unusual conditions but disallows their use to build 
any sort of loop.

A  few  languages  have  been  designed  without  a  goto—for 
example, Java, Python, and Ruby. However, most currently popular 
languages include a goto statement. Kernighan and Ritchie (1978) 
call the goto infinitely abusable, but it is nevertheless included in 
Ritchie’s language, C. The languages that have eliminated the goto 
have provided additional control statements, usually in the form of 
loop exits, to code one of the justifiable applications of the goto.

The relatively new language, C#, includes a goto, even though 
one of the languages on which it is based, Java, does not. One 
legitimate use of C#’s goto is in the switch statement, as discussed 
in Section 8.2.2.2.

All of the loop exit statements discussed in Section 8.3.3 are actually cam-
ouf laged goto statements. They are, however, severely restricted gotos and are 
not harmful to readability. In fact, it can be argued that they improve readability, 
because to avoid their use results in convoluted and unnatural code that would 
be much more difficult to understand.

8.5  Guarded Commands

Quite different forms of selection and loop structures were suggested by Dijkstra 
(1975). His primary motivation was to provide control statements that would 
support a program design methodology that ensured correctness during devel-
opment rather than when verifying or testing completed programs. This meth-
odology is described in Dijkstra (1976). Another motivation is the increased 
clarity in reasoning that is possible with guarded commands. Simply put, a select-
able segment of a selection statement in a guarded-command statement can be 
considered independently of any other part of the statement, which is not true 
for the selection statements of the common programming languages.

Guarded commands are covered in this chapter because they are the basis 
for the linguistic mechanism developed later for concurrent programming in 

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   356

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
8.5  Guarded Commands 

  357

CSP (Hoare, 1978). Guarded commands are also used to define functions in 
Haskell, as discussed in Chapter 15.

Dijkstra’s selection statement has the form

if <Boolean expression> -> <statement>
[] <Boolean expression> -> <statement>
[] . . . 
[] <Boolean expression> -> <statement>
fi

The closing reserved word, fi, is the opening reserved word spelled back-
ward. This form of closing reserved word is taken from ALGOL 68. The small 
blocks, called fatbars, are used to separate the guarded clauses and allow the 
clauses to be statement sequences. Each line in the selection statement, consist-
ing of a Boolean expression (a guard) and a statement or statement sequence, 
is called a guarded command.

This selection statement has the appearance of a multiple selection, but its 
semantics is different. All of the Boolean expressions are evaluated each time 
the statement is reached during execution. If more than one expression is true, 
one of the corresponding statements can be nondeterministically chosen for 
execution. An implementation might always choose the statement associated 
with the first Boolean expression that evaluates to be true. But it may choose 
any statement associated with a true Boolean expression. So, the correctness 
of the program cannot depend on which statement is chosen (among those 
associated with true Boolean expressions). If none of the Boolean expressions 
are true, a run-time error occurs that causes program termination. This forces 
the programmer to consider and list all possibilities. Consider the following 
example:

if i = 0 -> sum := sum + i
[] i > j -> sum := sum + j
[] j > i -> sum := sum + k
fi 

If i = 0 and j > i, this statement chooses nondeterministically between the 
first and third assignment statements. If i is equal to j and is not zero, a run-
time error occurs because none of the conditions are true.

This statement can be an elegant way of allowing the programmer to state 
that the order of execution, in some cases, is irrelevant. For example, to find 
the largest of two numbers, we can use

if  x >= y -> max := x
[] y >= x -> max := y
fi 

This computes the desired result without overspecifying the solution. In par-
ticular, if x and y are equal, it does not matter which we assign to max. This 
is a form of abstraction provided by the nondeterministic semantics of the 
statement.

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   357

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
358 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

Now, consider this same process coded in a traditional programming lan-

guage selector:

if (x >= y)
  max = x;
else
  max = y;

This could also be coded as follows:

if (x > y)
  max = x;
else
  max = y;

There is no practical difference between these two statements. The first assigns 
x to max when x and y are equal; the second assigns y to max in the same cir-
cumstance. This choice between the two statements complicates the formal 
analysis of the code and the correctness proof of it. This is one of the reasons 
why guarded commands were developed by Dijkstra.

The loop structure proposed by Dijkstra has the form

do <Boolean expression> -> <statement>
[] <Boolean expression> -> <statement>
[] . . . 
[] <Boolean expression> -> <statement>
od

The semantics of this statement is that all Boolean expressions are evaluated 
on each iteration. If more than one is true, one of the associated statements 
is nondeterministically (perhaps randomly) chosen for execution, after which 
the expressions are again evaluated. When all expressions are simultaneously 
false, the loop terminates.

Consider the following problem: Given four integer variables, q1, q2, q3, 
and q4, rearrange the values of the four so that q1  6  =  q2  6 =  q3  6 =  q4. 
Without guarded commands, one straightforward solution is to put the four val-
ues into an array, sort the array, and then assign the values from the array back 
into the scalar variables q1, q2, q3, and q4. While this solution is not difficult, 
it requires a good deal of code, especially if the sort process must be included.
Now, consider the following code, which uses guarded commands to solve 

the same problem but in a more concise and elegant way.6

do q1 > q2 -> temp := q1; q1 := q2; q2 := temp;
[] q2 > q3 -> temp := q2; q2 := q3; q3 := temp;
[] q3 > q4 -> temp := q3; q3 := q4; q4 := temp;
od 

6.  This code appears in a slightly different form in Dijkstra (1975).

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   358

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
 
8.6  Conclusions 

  359

Dijkstra’s guarded command control statements are interesting, in part 
because they illustrate how the syntax and semantics of statements can have an 
impact on program verification and vice versa. Program verification is virtually 
impossible when goto statements are used. Verification is greatly simplified if 
(1) only logical loops and selections are used or (2) only guarded commands are 
used. The axiomatic semantics of guarded commands are conveniently spec-
ified (Gries, 1981). It should be obvious, however, that there is considerably 
increased complexity in the implementation of the guarded commands over 
their conventional deterministic counterparts.

8.6  Conclusions

We have described and discussed a variety of statement-level control structures. 
A brief evaluation now seems to be in order.

First, we have the theoretical result that only sequence, selection, and 
 pretest logical loops are absolutely required to express computations (Böhm 
and Jacopini, 1966). This result has been used by those who wish to ban uncon-
ditional branching altogether. Of course, there are already sufficient practical 
problems with the goto to condemn it without also using a theoretical reason. 
One of the main legitimate needs for gotos—premature exits from loops—can 
be met with restricted branch statements, such as break.

One obvious misuse of the Böhm and Jacopini result is to argue against 
the inclusion of any control structures beyond selection and pretest logical 
loops. No widely used language has yet taken that step; furthermore, we doubt 
that any ever will, because of the negative effect on writability and readability. 
Programs written with only selection and pretest logical loops are generally less 
natural in structure, more complex, and therefore harder to write and more dif-
ficult to read. For example, the C# multiple selection structure is a great boost 
to C# writability, with no obvious negatives. Another example is the counting 
loop structure of many languages, especially when the statement is simple.

It is not so clear that the utility of many of the other control structures that 
have been proposed is worth their inclusion in languages (Ledgard and Mar-
cotty, 1975). This question rests to a large degree on the fundamental question 
of whether the size of languages must be minimized. Both Wirth (1975) and 
Hoare (1973) strongly endorse simplicity in language design. In the case of 
control structures, simplicity means that only a few control statements should 
be in a language, and they should be simple.

The  rich  variety  of  statement-level  control  structures  that  have  been 
invented shows the diversity of opinion among language designers. After all 
the invention, discussion, and evaluation, there is still no unanimity of opinion 
on the precise set of control statements that should be in a language. Most con-
temporary languages do, of course, have similar control statements, but there 
is still some variation in the details of their syntax and semantics. Furthermore, 
there is still disagreement on whether a language should include a goto; C++ 
and C# do, but Java and Ruby do not.

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   359

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
360 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

S U M M A R Y

Control statements occur in several categories: selection, multiple selection, 
iterative, and unconditional branching.

The  switch  statement  of  the  C-based  languages  is  representative  of 
 multiple-selection statements. The C# version eliminates the reliability prob-
lem of its predecessors by disallowing the implicit continuation from a selected 
segment to the following selectable segment.

A large number of different loop statements have been invented for high-
level languages. C’s  for statement is the most f lexible iteration statement, 
although its f lexibility leads to some reliability problems.

Most languages have exit statements for their loops; these statements take 

the place of one of the most common uses of goto statements.

Data-based iterators are loop statements for processing data structures, such 
as linked lists, hashes, and trees. The for statement of the C-based languages 
allows the user to create iterators for user-defined data. The foreach statement 
of Perl and C# is a predefined iterator for standard data structures. In the con-
temporary object-oriented languages, iterators for collections are specified with 
standard interfaces, which are implemented by the designers of the collections.
Ruby includes iterators that are a special form of methods that are sent to 
various objects. The language predefines iterators for common uses, but also 
allows user-defined iterators.

The unconditional branch, or goto, has been part of most imperative lan-
guages. Its problems have been widely discussed and debated. The current 
consensus is that it should remain in most languages but that its dangers should 
be minimized through programming discipline.

Dijkstra’s guarded commands are alternative control statements with pos-
itive theoretical characteristics. Although they have not been adopted as the 
control statements of a language, part of the semantics appear in the concur-
rency mechanisms of CSP and the function definitions of Haskell.

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  What is the definition of control structure?
2.  What did Böhm and Jocopini prove about f lowcharts?
3.  What is the definition of block?
4.  What is/are the design issue(s) for all selection and iteration control 

statements?

5.  What are the design issues for selection structures?

6.  What is unusual about Python’s design of compound statements?
7.  Under what circumstances must an F# selector have an else clause?
8.  What are the common solutions to the nesting problem for two-way selectors?

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   360

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
Problem Set 

  361

9.  What are the design issues for multiple-selection statements?

10.  Between what two language characteristics is a trade-off made when 

deciding whether more than one selectable segment is executed in one 
execution of a multiple selection statement?

11.  What is unusual about C’s multiple-selection statement?

12.  On what previous language was C’s switch statement based?

13.  Explain how C#’s switch statement is safer than that of C.

14.  What are the design issues for all iterative control statements?

15.  What are the design issues for counter-controlled loop statements?

16.  What is a pretest loop statement? What is a posttest loop statement?
17.  What is the difference between the for statement of C++ and that 

of Java?

18.  In what way is C’s for statement more f lexible than that of many other 

languages?

19.  What does the range function in Python do?

20.  What contemporary languages do not include a goto?

21.  What are the design issues for logically controlled loop statements?

22.  What is the main reason user-located loop control statements were 

invented?

23.  What are the design issues for user-located loop control mechanisms?

24.  What advantage does Java’s break statement have over C’s break 

statement?

25.  What are the differences between the break statement of C++ and that 

of Java?

26.  What is a user-defined iteration control?

27.  What Scheme function implements a multiple selection statement?

28.  How does a functional language implement repetition?

29.  How are iterators implemented in Ruby?

30.  What language predefines iterators that can be explicitly called to iterate 

over its predefined data structures?

31.  What common programming language borrows part of its design from 

Dijkstra’s guarded commands?

P R O B L E M   S E T

1.  Describe three situations where a combined counting and logical looping 

statement is needed.

2.  Study the iterator feature of CLU in Liskov et al. (1981) and determine 

its advantages and disadvantages.

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   361

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
362 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

3.  Compare the set of Ada control statements with those of C# and decide 

which are better and why.

4.  What are the pros and cons of using unique closing reserved words on 

compound statements?

5.  What are the arguments, pros and cons, for Python’s use of indentation 

to specify compound statements in control statements?

6.  Analyze the potential readability problems with using closure reserved 

words for control statements that are the reverse of the corresponding initial 
reserved words, such as the case-esac reserved words of ALGOL 68. For 
example, consider common typing errors such as transposing characters.

7.  Use the Science Citation Index to find an article that refers to Knuth 
(1974). Read the article and Knuth’s paper and write a paper that 
summarizes both sides of the goto issue.

8.  In his paper on the goto issue, Knuth (1974) suggests a loop control 
statement that allows multiple exits. Read the paper and write an 
operational semantics description of the statement.

9.  What are the arguments both for and against the exclusive use of 

Boolean expressions in the control statements in Java (as opposed to also 
allowing arithmetic expressions, as in C++)?

10.  Describe a programming situation in which the else clause in Python’s 

for statement would be convenient.

11.  Describe three specific programming situations that require a posttest loop.

12.  Speculate as to the reason control can be transferred into a C loop 

statement.

P R O G R A M M I N G   E X E R C I S E S

1.  Rewrite the following pseudocode segment using a loop structure in the 

specified languages:

  k = (j + 13) / 27
loop:
  if k > 10 then goto  out
  k = k + 1
  i = 3 * k - 1
  goto  loop
out: . . . 

a.  C, C++, Java, or C#
b. Python
c.  Ruby

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   362

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
 
Programming Exercises 

  363

Assume all variables are integer type. Discuss which language, for this 
code, has the best writability, the best readability, and the best combina-
tion of the two.

2.  Redo Programming Exercise 1, except this time make all the variables 

and constants f loating-point type, and change the statement

k = k + 1

to

k = k + 1.2

3.  Rewrite the following code segment using a multiple-selection statement 

in the following languages:

if ((k == 1) || (k == 2)) j = 2 * k - 1
if ((k == 3) || (k == 5)) j = 3 * k + 1
if (k == 4) j = 4 * k - 1
if ((k == 6) || (k == 7) || (k == 8)) j = k - 2

a.  C, C++, Java, or C#
b. Python
c.  Ruby

Assume all variables are integer type. Discuss the relative merits of the 
use of these languages for this particular code.

4.  Consider the following C program segment. Rewrite it using no gotos or 

breaks.

j = -3;
for (i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
  switch  (j + 2) {
    case  3:
    case  2: j--; break;
    case  0: j += 2; break;
    default: j = 0;
  }
  if  (j > 0)  break;
 j = 3 - i
}

5.  In a letter to the editor of CACM, Rubin (1987) uses the following 

code segment as evidence that the readability of some code with gotos 
is better than the equivalent code without gotos. This code finds the 
first row of an n by n integer matrix named x that has nothing but zero 
values.

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   363

1/5/18   10:45 PM

 
 
 
364 

  Chapter 8  

 Statement-Level Control Structures 

for (i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
  for (j = 1; j <= n; j++)
    if (x[i][j] != 0)
     goto reject;
  println ('First all-zero row is:', i);
  break;
reject:
 }

Rewrite this code without gotos in one of the following languages: C, 
C++, Java, or C#. Compare the readability of your code to that of the 
example code.

6.  Consider the following programming problem: The values of three 

integer variables—first, second, and third—must be placed in the 
three variables max, mid, and min, with the obvious meanings, without 
using arrays or user-defined or predefined subprograms. Write two 
solutions to this problem, one that uses nested selections and one that 
does not. Compare the complexity and expected reliability of the two.

7.  Rewrite the C program segment of Programming Exercise 4 using if 

and goto statements in C.

8.  Rewrite the C program segment of Programming Exercise 4 in Java 

without using a switch statement.

9.  Translate the following call to Scheme’s COND to C and set the resulting 

value to y.

 (COND
  ((> x 10) x)
  ((< x 5) (* 2 x))
  ((= x 7) (+ x 10))
 )

M08_SEBE8029_12_SE_C08.indd   364

1/5/18   10:45 PM
