# Fuente
- archivo: 389-440.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/Robert W. Sebesta - Concepts of Programming Languages-Pearson (2019)/389-440.pdf
- extraido: 2026-03-26T16:13:22

# Contenido

9 

Subprograms

  9.1  Introduction

  9.2  Fundamentals of Subprograms

  9.3  Design Issues for Subprograms

  9.4  Local Referencing Environments

  9.5  Parameter-Passing Methods

  9.6  Parameters That Are Subprograms

  9.7  Calling Subprograms Indirectly

  9.8  Design Issues for Functions

  9.9  Overloaded Subprograms

 9.10  Generic Subprograms

 9.11  User-Defined Overloaded Operators

 9.12  Closures

 9.13  Coroutines

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   365

1/5/18   10:47 PM

365

366 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

S ubprograms are the fundamental building blocks of programs and are there-

fore among the most important concepts in programming language design. 
We now explore the design of subprograms, including parameter-passing 

methods, local referencing environments, overloaded subprograms, generic subpro-
grams, and the aliasing and problematic side effects that are associated with subpro-
grams. We also include discussions of indirectly called subprograms, closures, and 
coroutines.

Implementation methods for subprograms are discussed in Chapter 10.

9.1  Introduction

Two fundamental abstraction facilities can be included in a programming lan-
guage: process abstraction and data abstraction. In the early history of high-
level programming languages, only process abstraction was included. Process 
abstraction, in the form of subprograms, has been a central concept in all pro-
gramming languages. In the 1980s, however, many people began to believe 
that data abstraction was equally important. Data abstraction is discussed in 
detail in Chapter 11.

The first programmable computer, Babbage’s Analytical Engine, built in 
the 1840s, had the capability of reusing collections of instruction cards at sev-
eral different places in a program. In a modern programming language, such a 
collection of statements is written as a subprogram. This reuse results in savings 
in memory space and coding time. Such reuse is also an abstraction, for the 
details of the subprogram’s computation are replaced in a program by a state-
ment that calls the subprogram. Instead of describing how some computation 
is to be done in a program, that description (the collection of statements in the 
subprogram) is enacted by a call statement, effectively abstracting away the 
details. This increases the readability of a program by emphasizing its logical 
structure while hiding its low-level details.

The  methods  of  object-oriented  languages  are  closely  related  to  the 
subprograms discussed in this chapter. The primary way methods differ from 
subprograms is the way they are called and their associations with classes and 
objects. Although these special characteristics of methods are discussed in 
Chapter 12, the features they share with subprograms, such as parameters 
and local variables, are discussed in this chapter.

9.2  Fundamentals of Subprograms

9.2.1  General Subprogram Characteristics

All subprograms discussed in this chapter, except the coroutines described in 
Section 9.13, have the following characteristics:

•  Each subprogram has a single entry point.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   366

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.2  Fundamentals of Subprograms 

  367

•  The calling program unit is suspended during the execution of the called 
subprogram, which implies that there is only one subprogram in execution 
at any given time.

•  Control  always  returns  to  the  caller  when  the  subprogram  execution 

terminates.

Alternatives to these result in coroutines and concurrent units (Chapter 13).

Most subprograms have names, although some are anonymous. Sec-

tion 9.12 has examples of anonymous subprograms in C#.

9.2.2  Basic Definitions

A subprogram definition describes the interface to and the actions of the sub-
program abstraction. A subprogram call is the explicit request that a specific 
subprogram be executed. A subprogram is said to be active if, after having been 
called, it has begun execution but has not yet completed that execution. The 
two fundamental kinds of subprograms, procedures and functions, are defined 
and discussed in Section 9.2.4.

A subprogram header, which is the first part of the definition, serves 
several purposes. First, it specifies that the following syntactic unit is a subpro-
gram definition of some particular kind.1 In languages that have more than one 
kind of subprogram, the kind of the subprogram is usually specified with a 
special word. Second, if the subprogram is not anonymous, the header provides 
a name for the subprogram. Third, it may specify a list of parameters.

Consider the following header examples:

def adder parameters):

This is the header of a Python subprogram named adder. Ruby subprogram 
headers also begin with def. The header of a JavaScript subprogram begins 
with function.

In C, the header of a function named adder might be as follows:

void adder (parameters)

The reserved word void in this header indicates that the subprogram does not 
return a value.

The body of subprograms defines its actions. In the C-based languages 
(and some others—for example, JavaScript) the body of a subprogram is delim-
ited by braces. In Ruby, an end statement terminates the body of a subprogram. 
As with compound statements, the statements in the body of a Python function 
must be indented and the end of the body is indicated by the first statement 
that is not indented.

One characteristic of Python functions that sets them apart from the func-
tions of other common programming languages is that function def statements 
are executable. When a def statement is executed, it assigns the given name to 

1.  Some programming languages include both kinds of subprograms, procedures and functions.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   367

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
368 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

the given function body. Until a function’s def has been executed, the function 
cannot be called. Consider the following skeletal example:

if . . . 
  def fun( . . . ):
    . . . 
else
  def fun( . . . ):
    . . . 

If the then clause of this selection construct is executed, that version of the 
function fun can be called, but not the version in the else clause. Likewise, if 
the else clause is chosen, its version of the function can be called but the one 
in the then clause cannot.

Ruby methods differ from the subprograms of other programming lan-
guages in several interesting ways. Ruby methods are often defined in class 
definitions but can also be defined outside class definitions, in which case they 
are considered methods of the root object, Object. Such methods can be called 
without an object receiver, as if they were functions in C or C++. If a Ruby 
method is called without a receiver, self is assumed. If there is no method 
by that name in the class, enclosing classes are searched, up to  Object, if 
necessary.

The parameter profile of a subprogram contains the number, order, 
and  types  of  its  formal  parameters.  The protocol  of  a  subprogram  is  its 
parameter profile plus, if it is a function, its return type. In languages in 
which subprograms have types, those types are defined by the subprogram’s 
protocol.

Subprograms can have declarations as well as definitions. This form par-
allels the variable declarations and definitions in C, in which declarations are 
used to provide type information but not to define variables. Subprogram dec-
larations provide the subprogram’s protocol but do not include their bodies. 
They are necessary in languages that do not allow forward references to sub-
programs. In both the cases of variables and subprograms, declarations are 
needed for static type checking. In the case of subprograms, it is the type of 
the parameters that must be checked. Function declarations are common in C 
and C++ programs, where they are called prototypes. Such declarations are 
often placed in header files.

In most other languages (other than C and C++), subprograms do not need 
declarations, because there is no requirement that subprograms be defined 
before they are called.

9.2.3  Parameters

Subprograms typically describe computations. There are two ways that a non-
method subprogram can gain access to the data that it is to process: through 
direct  access  to  nonlocal  variables  (declared  elsewhere  but  visible  in  the 

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   368

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.2  Fundamentals of Subprograms 

  369

subprogram) or through parameter passing. Data passed through parameters 
are accessed using names that are local to the subprogram. Parameter passing is 
more f lexible than direct access to nonlocal variables. In essence, a subprogram 
with parameter access to the data that it is to process is a parameterized com-
putation. It can perform its computation on whatever data it receives through 
its parameters (presuming the types of the parameters are as expected by the 
subprogram). If data access is through nonlocal variables, the only way the 
computation can proceed on different data is to assign new values to those non-
local variables between calls to the subprogram. Extensive access to nonlocals 
can reduce reliability. Variables that are visible to the subprogram where access 
is desired often end up also being visible where access to them is not needed. 
This problem was discussed in Chapter 5.

Although methods also access external data through nonlocal references 
and parameters, the primary data to be processed by a method is the object 
through which the method is called. However, when a method does access 
nonlocal data, the reliability problems are the same as with nonmethod sub-
programs. Also, in an object-oriented language, method access to class vari-
ables (those associated with the class, rather than an object) is related to the 
concept of nonlocal data and should be avoided whenever possible. In this 
case, as well as the case of a C function accessing nonlocal data, the method 
can have the side effect of changing something other than its parameters or 
local data. Such changes complicate the semantics of the method and make 
it less reliable.

Pure functional programming languages, such as Haskell, do not have 
mutable data, so functions written in them are unable to change memory in 
any way—they simply perform calculations and return a resulting value (or 
function, since functions are values in a pure functional language).

In some situations, it is convenient to be able to transmit computations, 
rather than data, as parameters to subprograms. In these cases, the name of 
the subprogram that implements that computation may be used as a param-
eter. This form of parameter is discussed in Section 9.6. Data parameters are 
discussed in Section 9.5.

The parameters in the subprogram header are called formal parameters. 
They are sometimes thought of as dummy variables because they are not vari-
ables in the usual sense: In most cases, they are bound to storage only when the 
subprogram is called, and that binding is often through some other program 
variables.

Subprogram call statements must include the name of the subprogram and 
a list of parameters to be bound to the formal parameters of the subprogram. 
These parameters are called actual parameters.2 They must be distinguished 
from formal parameters, because the two usually have different restrictions on 
their forms, and of course, their uses are quite different.

2.  Some authors call actual parameters arguments and formal parameters just parameters.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   369

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
370 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

In  most  programming  languages,  the  correspondence  between  actual 
and  formal  parameters—or  the  binding  of  actual  parameters  to  formal 
parameters—is done by position: The first actual parameter is bound to the 
first formal parameter and so forth. Such parameters are called positional 
 parameters. This is an effective and safe method of relating actual parameters 
to their corresponding formal parameters, as long as the parameter lists are 
relatively short.

When parameter lists are long, however, it is easy for a programmer to 
make mistakes in the order of actual parameters in the list. One solution to this 
problem is to provide keyword parameters, in which the name of the formal 
parameter to which an actual parameter is to be bound is specified with the 
actual parameter in a call. The advantage of keyword parameters is that they 
can appear in any order in the actual parameter list. Python functions can be 
called using this technique, as in

sumer(length = my_length,
      list = my_array,
      sum = my_sum)

where the definition of sumer has the formal parameters length, list, and 
sum.

The disadvantage to keyword parameters is that the user of the subpro-

gram must know the names of formal parameters.

In addition to keyword parameters, some languages, for example Python, 
allow positional parameters. Keyword and positional parameters can be mixed 
in a call, as in

sumer(my_length,
      sum = my_sum,
      list = my_array)

The  only  restriction  with  this  approach  is  that  after  a  keyword  parameter 
appears in the list, all remaining parameters must be keyworded. This restric-
tion is necessary because a position may no longer be well defined after a key-
word parameter has appeared.

In Python, Ruby, C++, and PHP, formal parameters can have default val-
ues. A default value is used if no actual parameter is passed to the formal 
parameter in the subprogram header. Consider the following Python function 
header:

def compute_pay(income, exemptions = 1, tax_rate)

The exemptions formal parameter can be absent in a call to compute_pay; 
when it is, the value 1 is used. No comma is included for an absent actual 
parameter in a Python call, because the only value of such a comma would 
be to indicate the position of the next parameter, which in this case is not 

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   370

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.2  Fundamentals of Subprograms 

  371

necessary because all actual parameters after an absent actual parameter must 
be keyworded. For example, consider the following call:

pay = compute_pay(20000.0, tax_rate = 0.15)

In C++, which does not support keyword parameters, the rules for default 
parameters are necessarily different. The default parameters must appear last, 
because parameters are positionally associated. Once a default parameter is 
omitted in a call, all remaining formal parameters must have default values. A 
C++ function header for the compute_pay function can be written as follows:

float compute_pay(float income, float tax_rate,
                   int exemptions = 1)

Notice that the parameters are rearranged so that the one with the default value 
is last. An example call to the C++ compute_pay function is

pay = compute_pay(20000.0, 0.15);

In most languages that do not have default values for formal parameters, 
the number of actual parameters in a call must match the number of formal 
parameters in the subprogram definition header. However, in C, C++, Perl, 
and JavaScript, this is not required. When there are fewer actual parameters in 
a call than formal parameters in a function definition, it is the programmer’s 
responsibility to ensure that the parameter correspondence, which is always 
positional, and the subprogram execution are sensible.

Although this design, which allows a variable number of parameters, is 
clearly prone to error, it is also sometimes convenient. For example, the printf 
function of C can print any number of items (data values and/or literals).

C# allows methods to accept a variable number of parameters, as long 
as they are of the same type. The method specifies its formal parameter with 
the params modifier. The call can send either an array or a list of expressions, 
whose values are placed in an array by the compiler and provided to the called 
method. For example, consider the following method:

public void DisplayList(params int[] list) {
   foreach (int next in list) {
      Console.WriteLine("Next value {0}", next);
   }
}

If DisplayList is defined for the class MyClass and we have the following 
declarations,

Myclass myObject = new Myclass;
int[] myList = new int[6] {2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12};

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   371

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
372 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

DisplayList could be called with either of the following:

myObject.DisplayList(myList);
myObject.DisplayList(2, 4, 3 * x - 1, 17);

Ruby supports a complicated but highly f lexible actual parameter config-
uration. The initial parameters are expressions, whose value objects are passed 
to the corresponding formal parameters. The initial parameters can be followed 
by a list of key => value pairs, which are placed in an anonymous hash and a 
reference to that hash is passed to the next formal parameter. These are used 
as a substitute for keyword parameters, which Ruby does not support. The hash 
item  can  be  followed  by  a  single  parameter  preceded  by  an  asterisk.  This 
parameter is called the array formal parameter. When the method is called, the 
array formal parameter is set to reference a new Array object. All remaining 
actual parameters are assigned to the elements of the new Array object. If the 
actual parameter that corresponds to the array formal parameter is an array, it 
must also be preceded by an asterisk, and it must be the last actual parameter.3 
So, Ruby allows a variable number of parameters in a way similar to that of C#. 
Because Ruby arrays can store different types, there is no requirement that the 
actual parameters passed to the array have the same type.

The following example skeletal function definition and call illustrate the 

parameter structure of Ruby:

list = [2, 4, 6, 8]
def tester(p1, p2, p3, *p4)
  . . . 
end  . . . 
tester('first', mon => 72, tue => 68, wed => 59, *list)

Inside tester, the values of its formal parameters are as follows:

p1 is 'first'
p2 is {mon => 72, tue => 68, wed => 59}
p3 is 2
p4 is [4, 6, 8]

Python supports parameters that are similar to those of Ruby.

9.2.4  Procedures and Functions

There  are  two  distinct  categories  of  subprograms—procedures  and 
 functions—both of which can be viewed as approaches to extending the lan-
guage. Subprograms are collections of statements that define parameterized 

3.  Not quite true, because the array formal parameter can be followed by a method or function 

reference, which is preceded by an ampersand (&).

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   372

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
 
9.2  Fundamentals of Subprograms 

  373

computations. Functions return values and procedures do not. In most lan-
guages that do not include procedures as a separate form of subprogram, 
functions can be defined not to return values and they can be used as proce-
dures. The computations of a procedure are enacted by single call statements. 
In effect, procedures define new statements. For example, if a particular lan-
guage does not have a sort statement, a user can build a procedure to sort 
arrays of data and use a call to that procedure in place of the unavailable sort 
statement. Only some older languages, such as Fortran and Ada, support 
procedures.

Procedures can produce results in the calling program unit by two meth-
ods: (1) If there are variables that are not formal parameters but are still visible 
in both the procedure and the calling program unit, the procedure can change 
them; and (2) if the procedure has formal parameters that allow the transfer of 
data to the caller, those parameters can be changed.

Functions structurally resemble procedures but are semantically mod-
eled on mathematical functions. If a function is a faithful model, it produces 
no side effects; that is, it modifies neither its parameters nor any variables 
defined  outside  the  function.  Such  a  function  returns  a  value—that  is  its 
only desired effect. The functions in most programming languages have side 
effects.

Functions are called by appearances of their names in expressions, along 
with the required actual parameters. The value produced by a function’s exe-
cution is returned to the calling code, effectively replacing the call itself. For 
example, the value of the expression f(x) is whatever value f produces when 
called with the parameter x. For a function that does not produce side effects, 
the returned value is its only effect.

Functions define new user-defined operators. For example, if a language 
does not have an exponentiation operator, a function can be written that returns 
the value of one of its parameters raised to the power of another parameter. Its 
header in C++ could be

float power(float base, float exp)

which could be called with

result = 3.4 * power(10.0, x)

The standard C++ library includes a similar function named pow. Compare this 
with the same operation in Perl, in which exponentiation is a built-in operation:

result = 3.4 * 10.0 ** x

In some programming languages, users are permitted to overload operators 
by defining new functions for operators. User-defined overloaded operators are 
discussed in Section 9.11.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   373

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
374 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

9.3  Design Issues for Subprograms

Subprograms are complex structures, and it follows from this that a lengthy 
list of issues is involved in their design. One obvious issue is the choice of 
one or more parameter-passing methods that will be used. The wide variety 
of approaches that have been used in various languages is a ref lection of the 
diversity of opinion on the subject. A closely related issue is whether the types 
of actual parameters will be type checked against the types of the corresponding 
formal parameters.

The nature of the local environment of a subprogram dictates to some 
degree the nature of the subprogram. The most important question here is 
whether local variables are statically or dynamically allocated.

Next,  there  is  the  question  of  whether  subprogram  definitions  can  be 
nested. Another issue is whether subprogram names can be passed as parame-
ters. If subprogram names can be passed as parameters and the language allows 
subprograms to be nested, there is the question of the correct referencing 
environment of a subprogram that has been passed as a parameter.

As seen in Chapter 5, side effects of functions can cause problems. So, restric-
tions on side effects are a design issue for functions. The types and number of 
values that can be returned from functions are other design issues.

Finally, there are the questions of whether subprograms can be overloaded 
or generic. An overloaded subprogram is one that has the same name as 
another subprogram in the same referencing environment. A generic subpro-
gram is one whose computation can be done on data of different types in dif-
ferent calls. A closure is a nested subprogram and its referencing environment, 
which together allow the subprogram to be called from anywhere in a program.
The following is a summary of these design issues for subprograms in 
general. Additional issues that are specifically associated with functions are 
discussed in Section 9.10.

•  Are local variables statically or dynamically allocated?

•  Can subprogram definitions appear in other subprogram definitions?

•  What parameter-passing method or methods are used?

•  Are the types of the actual parameters checked against the types of the 

formal parameters?

•  If subprograms can be passed as parameters and subprograms can be nested, 

what is the referencing environment of a passed subprogram?

•  Are functional side effects allowed?

•  What types of values can be returned from functions?

•  How many values can be returned from functions?
•  Can subprograms be overloaded?
•  Can subprograms be generic?

•  If the language allows nested subprograms, are closures supported?

These issues and example designs are discussed in the following sections.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   374

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.4  Local Referencing Environments 

  375

9.4  Local Referencing Environments

This section discusses the issues related to variables that are defined within sub-
programs. The issue of nested subprogram definitions is also brief ly covered.

9.4.1  Local Variables

Subprograms can define their own variables, thereby defining local referencing 
environments. Variables that are defined inside subprograms are called local 
variables, because their scope is usually the body of the subprogram in which 
they are defined.

In the terminology of Chapter 5, local variables can be either static or 
stack dynamic. If local variables are stack dynamic, they are bound to stor-
age when the subprogram begins execution and are unbound from storage 
when that execution terminates. There are several advantages of stack-dynamic 
local variables, the primary one being f lexibility. It is essential that recursive 
subprograms have stack-dynamic local variables. Another advantage of stack- 
dynamic locals is that the storage for local variables in an active subprogram 
can be shared with the local variables in all inactive subprograms. This is not 
as important an advantage as it was when computers had smaller memories.

The main disadvantages of stack-dynamic local variables are the following: 
First, there is the cost of the time required to allocate, initialize (when neces-
sary), and deallocate such variables for each call to the subprogram. Second, 
accesses to stack-dynamic local variables must be indirect, whereas accesses to 
static variables can be direct.4 This indirectness is required because the place 
in the stack where a particular local variable will reside can be determined only 
during execution (see Chapter 10). Finally, when all local variables are stack 
dynamic, subprograms cannot be history sensitive; that is, they cannot retain 
data values of local variables between calls. It is sometimes convenient to be 
able to write history-sensitive subprograms. A common example of a need for 
a history-sensitive subprogram is one whose task is to generate pseudorandom 
numbers. Each call to such a subprogram computes one pseudorandom num-
ber, using the last one it computed. It must, therefore, store the last one in a 
static local variable. Coroutines and the subprograms used in iterator loop 
constructs (discussed in Chapter 8) are other examples of subprograms that 
need to be history sensitive.

The primary advantage of static local variables over stack-dynamic local 
variables is that they are slightly more efficient—they require no run-time over-
head for allocation and deallocation. Also, if accessed directly, these accesses are 
obviously more efficient. And, of course, they allow subprograms to be history 
sensitive. The greatest disadvantage of static local variables is their inability to 
support recursion. Also, their storage cannot be shared with the local variables 
of other inactive subprograms.

4.  In some implementations, static variables are also accessed indirectly, thereby eliminating 

this disadvantage.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   375

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
376 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

In most contemporary languages, local variables in a subprogram are by 
default stack dynamic. In C and C++ functions, locals are stack dynamic unless 
specifically declared to be static. For example, in the following C (or C++) 
function, the variable sum is static and count is stack dynamic.

int adder(int list[], int listlen) {
  static int sum = 0;
  int count;
  for (count = 0; count < listlen; count ++)
    sum += list [count];
  return  sum;
}

The methods of C++, Java, and C# have only stack-dynamic local variables.
In Python, the only declarations used in method definitions are for glo-
bals. Any variable declared to be global in a method must be a variable defined 
outside the method. A variable defined outside the method can be referenced 
in the method without declaring it to be global, but such a variable cannot be 
assigned in the method. If the name of a global variable is assigned in a method, 
it is implicitly declared to be a local and the assignment does not disturb the 
global. All local variables in Python methods are stack dynamic.

9.4.2  Nested Subprograms

The idea of nesting subprograms originated with ALGOL 60. The motivation was 
to be able to create a hierarchy of both logic and scopes. If a subprogram is needed 
only within another subprogram, why not place it there and hide it from the rest 
of the program? Because static scoping is usually used in languages that allow sub-
programs to be nested, this also provides a highly structured way to grant access to 
nonlocal variables in enclosing subprograms. Recall that in Chapter 5, the prob-
lems introduced by this were discussed. For a long time, the only languages that 
allowed nested subprograms were those directly descending from ALGOL 60, 
which were ALGOL 68, Pascal, and Ada. Many other languages, including all 
of the direct descendants of C, do not allow subprogram nesting. Recently, some 
new languages again allow it. Among these are JavaScript, Python, and Ruby. Also, 
most functional programming languages allow subprograms to be nested.

9.5  Parameter-Passing Methods

Parameter-passing methods are the ways in which parameters are transmitted 
to and/or from called subprograms. First, we focus on the different semantics 
models of parameter-passing methods. Then, we discuss the various implemen-
tation models invented by language designers for these semantics models. Next, 
we survey the design choices of several languages and discuss the actual methods 
used to implement the implementation models. Finally, we consider the design 
considerations that face a language designer in choosing among the methods.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   376

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.5.1  Semantics Models of Parameter Passing

9.5  Parameter-Passing Methods 

  377

Formal parameters are characterized by one of three distinct semantics models: 
(1) They can receive data from the corresponding actual parameter; (2) they can 
transmit data to the actual parameter; or (3) they can do both. These models are 
called in mode, out mode, and inout mode, respectively. For example, con-
sider a subprogram that takes two arrays of int values as parameters—list1 
and list2. The subprogram must add list1 to list2 and return the result 
as a revised version of list2. Furthermore, the subprogram must create a new 
array from the two given arrays and return it. For this subprogram, list1 
should be in mode, because it is not to be changed by the subprogram. list2 
must be inout mode, because the subprogram needs the given value of the array 
and must return its new value. The third array should be out mode, because 
there is no initial value for this array and its computed value must be returned 
to the caller.

There  are  two  conceptual  models  of  how  data  transfers  take  place  in 
parameter transmission: Either an actual value is copied (to the caller, to the 
called, or both ways) or an access path is transmitted. Most commonly, the 
access path is a simple pointer or reference. Figure 9.1 illustrates the three 
semantics models of parameter passing when values are copied.

9.5.2 

Implementation Models of Parameter Passing

A variety of models have been developed by language designers to guide the 
implementation of the three basic parameter transmission modes. In the fol-
lowing sections, we discuss several of these, along with their relative strengths 
and weaknesses.

Figure 9.1

The three semantics 
models of parameter 
passing when physical 
moves are used

Caller
(sub (a, b, c))

Call

Callee
(void sub (int x, int y, int z))

a

b

c

In mode

Out mode

Return

Call

Inout mode

Return

x

y

z

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   377

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
378 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

9.5.2.1  Pass-by-Value

When a parameter is passed by value, the value of the actual parameter is used 
to initialize the corresponding formal parameter, which then acts as a local 
variable in the subprogram, thus implementing in-mode semantics.

Pass-by-value is normally implemented by copy, because accesses often are 
more efficient with this approach. It could be implemented by transmitting an 
access path to the value of the actual parameter in the caller, but that would 
require that the value be in a write-protected cell (one that can only be read). 
Enforcing the write protection is not always a simple matter. For example, sup-
pose the subprogram to which the parameter was passed passes it in turn to 
another subprogram. This is another reason to use copy transfer. As we will see 
in Section 9.5.4, C++ provides a convenient and effective method for specifying 
write protection on pass-by-value parameters that are transmitted by access path.
The advantage of pass-by-value is that for scalars it is fast, in both linkage 

cost and access time.

The main disadvantage of the pass-by-value method if copies are used is 
that additional storage is required for the formal parameter, either in the called 
subprogram or in some area outside both the caller and the called subprogram. 
In addition, the actual parameter must be copied to the storage area for the 
corresponding formal parameter. The storage and the copy operations can be 
costly if the parameter is large, such as an array with many elements.

9.5.2.2  Pass-by-Result

Pass-by-result is an implementation model for out-mode parameters. When 
a parameter is passed by result, no value is transmitted to the subprogram. The 
corresponding formal parameter acts as a local variable, but just before control 
is transferred back to the caller, its value is transmitted back to the caller’s actual 
parameter, which obviously must be a variable. (How would the caller reference 
the computed result if it were a literal or an expression?)

The pass-by-result method has the advantages and disadvantages of pass-
by-value, plus some additional disadvantages. If values are returned by copy 
(as opposed to access paths), as they typically are, pass-by-result also requires 
the extra storage and the copy operations that are required by pass-by-value. 
As with pass-by-value, the difficulty of implementing pass-by-result by trans-
mitting an access path usually results in it being implemented by copy. In this 
case, the problem is in ensuring that the initial value of the actual parameter is 
not used in the called subprogram.

One additional problem with the pass-by-result model is that there can be 

an actual parameter collision, such as the one created with the call

sub(p1, p1)

In sub, assuming the two formal parameters have different names, the two can 
obviously be assigned different values. Then, whichever of the two is copied 
to their corresponding actual parameter last becomes the value of p1 in the 
caller. Thus, the order in which the actual parameters are copied determines 

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   378

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.5  Parameter-Passing Methods 

  379

their value. For example, consider the following C# method, which specifies the 
pass-by-result method with the out specifier on its formal parameter.5

void Fixer(out int x, out int y) {
  x = 17;
  y = 35;
}
. . .
f.Fixer(out a, out a);

If, at the end of the execution of Fixer, the formal parameter x is assigned to 
its corresponding actual parameter first, then the value of the actual parame-
ter a in the caller will be 35. If y is assigned first, then the value of the actual 
parameter a in the caller will be 17.

Because the order can be implementation dependent for some languages, 

different implementations can produce different results.

Calling a subprogram with two identical actual parameters can also lead to 
different kinds of problems when other parameter-passing methods are used, 
as discussed in Section 9.5.2.4.

Another problem that can occur with pass-by-result is that the implemen-
tor may be able to choose between two different times to evaluate the addresses 
of the actual parameters: at the time of the call or at the time of the return. For 
example, consider the following C# method and following code:

void DoIt(out int x, int index){
  x = 17;
  index = 42;
}
. . .
sub = 21;
f.DoIt(list[sub], sub);

The address of list[sub] changes between the beginning and end of the 
method. The implementor must choose the time to bind this parameter to an 
address—at the time of the call or at the time of the return. If the address is 
computed on entry to the method, the value 17 will be returned to list[21]; 
if computed just before return, 17 will be returned to list[42]. This makes 
programs unportable between an implementation that chooses to evaluate the 
addresses for out-mode parameters at the beginning of a subprogram and one 
that chooses to do that evaluation at the end. An obvious way to avoid this 
problem is for the language designer to specify when the address to be used to 
return the parameter value must be computed.

9.5.2.3  Pass-by-Value-Result

Pass-by-value-result is an implementation model for inout-mode parameters 
in which actual values are copied. It is in effect a combination of pass-by-value 
and pass-by-result. The value of the actual parameter is used to initialize the 

5.  The out specifier must also be specified on the corresponding actual parameter.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   379

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
380 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

corresponding formal parameter, which then acts as a local variable. In fact, 
pass-by-value-result formal parameters must have local storage associated with 
the called subprogram. At subprogram termination, the value of the formal 
parameter is transmitted back to the actual parameter.

Pass-by-value-result is sometimes called pass-by-copy, because the actual 
parameter is copied to the formal parameter at subprogram entry and then 
copied back at subprogram termination.

Pass-by-value-result  shares  with  pass-by-value  and  pass-by-result  the 
 disadvantages of requiring multiple storage for parameters and time for copy-
ing values. It shares with pass-by-result the problems associated with the order 
in which actual parameters are assigned.

The advantages of pass-by-value-result are relative to pass-by-reference, 

so they are discussed in Section 9.5.2.4.

9.5.2.4  Pass-by-Reference

Pass-by-reference is a second implementation model for inout-mode param-
eters. Rather than copying data values back and forth, however, as in pass-by-
value-result, the pass-by-reference method transmits an access path, usually just 
an address, to the called subprogram. This provides the access path to the cell 
storing the actual parameter. Thus, the called subprogram is allowed to access 
the actual parameter in the calling program unit. In effect, the actual parameter 
is shared with the called subprogram.

The advantage of pass-by-reference is that the passing process itself is 
efficient, in terms of both time and space. Duplicate space is not required and 
no copying is required.

There are, however, several disadvantages to the pass-by-reference method. 
First, access to the formal parameters will be slower than pass-by-value param-
eters, because of the additional level of indirect addressing that is required.6 
Second, if only one-way communication to the called subprogram is required, 
inadvertent and erroneous changes may be made to the actual parameter. This 
issue is addressed below.

Another problem of pass-by-reference is that aliases can be created. This 
problem should be expected, because pass-by-reference makes access paths avail-
able to the called subprograms, thereby providing access to nonlocal variables. 
The problem with these kinds of aliasing is the same as in other circumstances: It 
is harmful to readability and thus to reliability. It also makes program verification 
more difficult. Another issue with pass by reference is whether the called sub-
program is allowed to change a passed pointer. In C, this is  possible, but in some 
other languages, such as Pascal and C++, formal parameters that are addresses are 
implicitly dereferenced in the called subprogram, which prevents such changes.
There are several ways pass-by-reference parameters can create aliases. 
First, collisions can occur between actual parameters. Consider a C++ function 
that has two parameters that are to be passed by reference, as in

void fun(int &first, int &second)

6.  This is further explained in Section 9.5.3.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   380

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
 
9.5  Parameter-Passing Methods 

  381

If the call to fun happens to pass the same variable twice, as in

fun(total, total)

then first and second in fun will be aliases.

Second,  collisions  between  array  elements  can  also  cause  aliases.  For 
example, suppose the function fun is called with two array elements that are 
 specified with variable subscripts, as in

fun(list[i], list[j])

If these two parameters are passed by reference and i happens to be equal to 
j, then first and second are again aliases.

Third, if two of the formal parameters of a subprogram are an element 
of an array and the whole array, and both are passed by reference, then a call 
such as

fun1(list[i], list)

could result in aliasing in fun1, because fun1 can access all elements of list 
through the second parameter and access a single element through its first 
parameter.

Still  another  way  to  get  aliasing  with  pass-by-reference  parameters  is 
through collisions between formal parameters and nonlocal variables that are 
visible. For example, consider the following C code:

int * global;
void main() {
   . . .
   sub(global);
   . . .
}
 void  sub(int  * param) {
   . . .
}

Inside sub, param and global are aliases.

All these possible aliasing situations are eliminated if pass-by-value-result is 
used instead of pass-by-reference. However, in place of aliasing, other problems 
sometimes arise, as discussed in Section 9.5.2.3.

9.5.2.5  Pass-by-Name

Pass-by-name is an inout-mode parameter transmission method that does not 
correspond to a single implementation model. When parameters are passed by 
name, the actual parameter is, in effect, textually substituted for the correspond-
ing formal parameter in all its occurrences in the subprogram. This method is 
quite different from those discussed thus far; in which case, formal parameters 

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   381

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
382 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

are bound to actual values or addresses at the time of the subprogram call. A 
pass-by-name formal parameter is bound to an access method at the time of the 
subprogram call, but the actual binding to a value or an address is delayed until 
the formal parameter is assigned or referenced. Implementing a pass-by-name 
parameter requires a subprogram to be passed to the called subprogram to 
evaluate the address or value of the formal parameter. The referencing envi-
ronment of the passed subprogram must also be passed. This subprogram/
referencing environment is a closure (see Section 9.12).7 Pass-by-name param-
eters are both complex to implement and inefficient. They also add significant 
complexity to the program, thereby lowering its readability and reliability.

Because pass-by-name is not part of any widely used language, it is not 
discussed further here. However, it is used at compile time by the macros in 
assembly languages and for the generic parameters of the generic subprograms 
in C++, Java 5.0, and C# 2005, as discussed in Section 9.9.

9.5.3 

Implementing Parameter-Passing Methods

We now address the question of how the various implementation models of 
parameter passing are actually implemented.

In most contemporary languages, parameter communication takes place 
through the run-time stack. The run-time stack is initialized and maintained 
by the run-time system, which manages the execution of programs. The run-
time stack is used extensively for subprogram control linkage and parameter 
passing, as discussed in Chapter 10. In the following discussion, we assume that 
the stack is used for all parameter transmission.

Pass-by-value parameters have their values copied into stack locations. The 
stack locations then serve as storage for the corresponding formal parameters. 
Pass-by-result parameters are implemented as the opposite of pass-by-value. 
The values assigned to the pass-by-result actual parameters are placed in the 
stack, where they can be retrieved by the calling program unit upon termina-
tion of the called subprogram. Pass-by-value-result parameters can be imple-
mented directly from their semantics as a combination of pass-by-value and 
pass-by-result. The stack location for such a parameter is initialized by the call 
and is then used like a local variable in the called subprogram.

Pass-by-reference parameters are perhaps the simplest to implement. Most 
languages only allow variables to be passed by reference. However, Fortran 
passes all forms of parameters by reference. In Fortran, regardless of the type of 
the actual parameter, only its address must be placed in the stack. In the case of 
literals, the address of the literal is put in the stack. In the case of an expression, 
the compiler must build code to evaluate the expression, which must be exe-
cuted just before the transfer of control to the called subprogram. The address 
of the memory cell in which the code places the result of its evaluation is then 
put in the stack. The Fortran compiler must prevent the called subprogram 
from changing parameters that are literals or expressions.

7.  These closures were originally (in ALGOL 60) called thunks.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   382

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
 
9.5  Parameter-Passing Methods 

  383

Figure 9.2

One possible stack 
implementation 
of the common 
 parameter-passing 
methods

Function header: void sub (int a, int b, int c, int d)
Function call in main: sub (w,x,y,z)
(pass w by value, x by result, y by value-result, z by reference)

Access to the formal parameters in the called subprogram is by indirect 
addressing from the stack location of the address. The implementation of pass-
by-value, -result, -value-result, and -reference, where the run-time stack is 
used, is shown in Figure 9.2. Subprogram sub is called from main with the call 
sub(w, x, y, z), where w is passed by value, x is passed by result, y is passed 
by value-result, and z is passed by reference.

9.5.4  Parameter-Passing Methods of Some Common Languages

C uses pass-by-value. Pass-by-reference (inout mode) semantics is achieved by 
using pointers as parameters. The value of the pointer is made available to the 
called function and nothing is copied back. However, because what was passed 
is an access path to the data of the caller, the called function can change the 
caller’s data. But all references to pointer formal parameter must be explicitly 
dereferenced in the function. C copied this use of the pass-by-value method from 
ALGOL 68. In both C and C++, formal parameters can be typed as pointers to 
constants. The corresponding actual parameters need not be constants, for in such 
cases they are coerced to constants. This allows pointer parameters to provide 
the efficiency of pass-by-reference with the one-way semantics of pass-by-value. 
Write protection of those parameters in the called function is implicitly specified.
C++ includes a special pointer type, called a  reference type,  as discussed 
in Chapter 6, which is often used for parameters. Reference parameters are 
implicitly  dereferenced  in  the  function  or  method,  and  their  semantics  is 
pass-by-reference. C++ also allows reference parameters to be defined to be 
constants. For example, we could have

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   383

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
384 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

histor y note

ALGOL 60 introduced the 
pass-by-name method. It also 
allowed pass-by-value as an 
option. Primarily because of the 
difficulty in implementing them, 
pass-by-name parameters were 
not carried from ALGOL 60 to 
any subsequent languages that 
became popular (other than 
SIMULA 67).

histor y note

ALGOL W (Wirth and Hoare, 
1966) introduced the pass-by-
value-result method of param-
eter passing as an alternative 
to the inefficiency of pass-
by-name and the problems of 
pass-by-reference.

void fun(const int &p1, int p2, int &p3) { . . . }

where  p1  is  pass-by-reference  but  cannot  be  changed  in  the 
function fun, p2 is pass-by-value, and p3 is pass-by-reference. 
 Neither p1 nor p3 need be explicitly dereferenced in fun.

Constant parameters and in-mode parameters are not exactly 
alike. Constant parameters clearly implement in mode. However, 
in all of the common imperative languages except Ada, in-mode 
parameters can be assigned in the subprogram even though those 
changes are never ref lected in the values of the corresponding 
actual parameters. In Ada, such an assignment is illegal. Constant 
parameters can never be assigned.

As with C and C++, all Java parameters are passed by value. 
 However, because objects can be accessed only through reference vari-
ables, object parameters are in effect passed by reference. Although 
an object reference passed as a parameter cannot itself be changed 
in the called subprogram, the referenced object can be changed if 
a method is available to cause the change. Because reference vari-
ables cannot point to scalar variables directly and Java does not have  
pointers, scalars cannot be passed by reference in Java (although a 
reference to an object that contains a scalar can). Therefore, if a scalar 
is passed to a Java method, it cannot be changed by that method.

The  default  parameter-passing  method  of  C#  is  pass-by-
value. Pass-by-reference can be specified by preceding both a 
formal parameter and its corresponding actual parameter with ref. For exam-
ple, consider the following C# skeletal method and call:

void sumer(ref int oldSum, int newOne) { . . . }
. . .
sumer(ref sum, newValue);

The first parameter to sumer is passed by reference; the second is passed by 
value. All ref parameters must be assigned a value before they are passed to 
an actual parameter.

C#  also  supports  out-mode  parameters,  which  are  pass-by-reference 
parameters that do not need initial values. Such parameters are specified in the 
formal parameter list with the out modifier.

PHP’s parameter passing is similar to that of C#, except that either the actual 
parameter or the formal parameter can specify pass-by-reference. Pass-by-reference 
is specified by preceding one or both of the parameters with an ampersand.

In Swift, the default parameter passing method is pass by value, and for-
mal parameters passed this way cannot be changed in the called subprogram. 
Pass-by-reference semantics can be specified by preceding the formal param-
eter with the reserved word inout.

Perl employs a primitive means of passing parameters. All actual parame-
ters are implicitly placed in a predefined array named @_ (of all things!). The 
subprogram retrieves the actual parameter values (or addresses) from this array. 
The most peculiar thing about this array is its magical nature, exposed by the 

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   384

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.5  Parameter-Passing Methods 

  385

fact that its elements are in effect aliases for the actual parameters. Therefore, if 
an element of @_ is changed in the called subprogram, that change is ref lected 
in the corresponding actual parameter in the call, assuming there is a corre-
sponding actual parameter (the number of actual parameters need not be the 
same as the number of formal parameters) and it is a variable.

The parameter-passing method of Python and Ruby is called pass-by- 
assignment or pass-by-sharing. Because all data values are objects, every 
variable is a reference to an object. In pass-by-assignment, the actual parame-
ter value is assigned to the formal parameter. Therefore, pass-by-assignment 
is in effect pass-by-reference, because the value of all actual parameters are 
references. However, only in certain cases does this result in pass-by-reference 
semantics. For example, many objects are essentially immutable. In a pure 
object-oriented language, the process of changing the value of a variable with 
an assignment statement, as in

x = x + 1

does not change the object referenced by x. Rather, it takes the object refer-
enced by x, increments it by 1, thereby creating a new object (with the value  
x + 1), and then changes x to reference the new object. So, when a reference 
to a scalar object is passed to a subprogram, the object being referenced cannot 
be changed in place. Because the reference is passed by value, even though the 
formal parameter is changed in the subprogram, that change has no effect on 
the actual parameter in the caller.

Now, suppose a reference to an array is passed as a parameter. If the cor-
responding formal parameter is assigned a new array object, there is no effect 
on the caller. However, if the formal parameter is used to assign a value to an 
element of the array, as in

list[3] = 47

the  actual  parameter  is  affected.  So,  changing  the  reference  of  the  formal 
parameter has no effect on the caller, but changing an element of the array 
that is passed as a parameter does.

9.5.5  Type Checking Parameters

It is now widely accepted that software reliability demands that the types of actual 
parameters be checked for consistency with the types of the corresponding for-
mal parameters. Without such type checking, small typographical errors can lead 
to program errors that may be difficult to diagnose because they are not detected 
by the compiler or the run-time system. For example, in the function call

result = sub1(1)

the actual parameter is an integer constant. If the formal parameter of sub1 is 
a f loating-point type, no error will be detected without parameter type check-
ing. Although an integer 1 and a f loating-point 1 have the same value, the 

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   385

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
386 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

representations of these two are very different. sub1 cannot produce a correct 
result given an integer actual parameter value if it expects a f loating-point value.
Early programming languages, such as Fortran 77 and the original version 
of C, did not require parameter type checking; most later languages require 
it. However, the relatively recent languages Perl, JavaScript, and PHP do not.
C and C++ require some special discussion in the matter of parameter type 
checking. In the original C, neither the number of parameters nor their types 
were checked. In C89, the formal parameters of functions can be defined in 
two ways. They can be defined as in the original C; that is, the names of the 
parameters are listed in parentheses and the type declarations for them follow, 
as in the following function:

double sin(x)
  double x;
  { . . . }

Using this form avoids type checking, thereby allowing calls such as

double value;
int count;
. . .
value = sin(count);

to be legal, although they are never correct.

The alternative to the original C definition approach is called the proto-
type method, in which the formal parameter types are included in the list, as in

double sin(double x)
 { . . . }

If this version of sin is called with the same call, that is, with the following, it 
is also legal:

value = sin(count);

The type of the actual parameter (int) is checked against that of the formal 
parameter (double). Although they do not match, int is coercible to double 
(it is a widening coercion), so the conversion is done. If the conversion is not 
possible (for example, if the actual parameter had been an array) or if the num-
ber of parameters is wrong, then a semantics error is detected. So in C89, the 
user chooses whether parameters are to be type checked.

In C99 and C++, all functions must have their formal parameters in proto-
type form. However, type checking can be avoided for some of the parameters 
by replacing the last part of the parameter list with an ellipsis, as in

int  printf(const char* format_string, . . .);

A call to printf must include at least one parameter, a pointer to a literal 
character string. Beyond that, anything (including nothing) is legal. The way 

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   386

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.5  Parameter-Passing Methods 

  387

printf  determines whether there are additional parameters is by the pres-
ence of format codes in the string parameter. For example, the format code 
for integer output is %d. This appears as part of the string, as in the following:

printf("The sum is %d\n", sum);

The % tells the printf function that there is one more parameter.

There is one more interesting issue with actual to formal parameter coer-
cions when primitives can be passed by reference, as in C#. Suppose a call to a 
method passes a float value to a double formal parameter. If this parameter is 
passed by value, the float value is coerced to double and there is no problem. 
This particular coercion is very useful, for it allows a library to provide double 
versions of subprograms that can be used for both float and double values. 
However, suppose the parameter is passed by reference. When the value of 
the double formal parameter is returned to the float actual parameter in the 
caller, the value will overf low its location. To avoid this problem, C# requires 
the type of a ref actual parameter to match exactly the type of its correspond-
ing formal parameter (no coercion is allowed).

In Python and Ruby, there is no type checking of parameters, because typ-
ing in these languages is a different concept. Objects have types, but variables 
do not, so formal parameters are typeless. This disallows the very idea of type 
checking parameters.

9.5.6  Multidimensional Arrays as Parameters

The storage-mapping functions that are used to map the index values of ref-
erences to elements of multidimensional arrays to addresses in memory were 
discussed at length in Chapter 6. In some languages, such as C and C++, when a 
multidimensional array is passed as a parameter to a subprogram, the compiler 
must be able to build the mapping function for that array while seeing only 
the text of the subprogram (not the calling subprogram). This is true because 
the subprograms can be compiled separately from the programs that call them. 
Consider the problem of passing a matrix to a function in C. Multidimensional 
arrays in C are really arrays of arrays, and they are stored in row major order. 
Following is a storage-mapping function for row major order for matrices when 
the lower bound of all indices is 0 and the element size is 1:

address (mat[i, j]) = address(mat[0,0]) + i *
                                         number_of_columns + j

Notice that this mapping function needs the number of columns but not the 
number of rows. Therefore, in C and C++, when a matrix is passed as a param-
eter, the formal parameter must include the number of columns in the second 
pair of brackets. This is illustrated in the following skeletal C program:

void fun(int matrix[][10]) {
 . . . }
void main() {

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   387

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
388 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

  int mat[5][10];
  . . .
  fun(mat);
  . . .
}

The problem with this method of passing matrices as parameters is that it 
does not allow a programmer to write a function that can accept matrices with 
different numbers of columns; a new function must be written for every matrix 
with a different number of columns. This, in effect, disallows writing f lexible 
functions that may be effectively reusable if the functions deal with multidi-
mensional arrays. In C and C++, there is a way around the problem because of 
their inclusion of pointer arithmetic. The matrix can be passed as a pointer, and 
the actual dimensions of the matrix also can be passed as parameters. Then, the 
function can evaluate the user-written storage-mapping function using pointer 
arithmetic each time an element of the matrix must be referenced. For example, 
consider the following function prototype:

void fun(float *mat_ptr,
         int num_rows,
         int num_cols);

The following statement can be used to move the value of the variable x 

to the [row][col] element of the parameter matrix in fun:

*(mat_ptr + (row * num_cols) + col) = x;

Although this works, it is obviously difficult to read, and because of its com-
plexity, it is error prone. The difficulty with reading this can be alleviated by 
using a macro to define the storage-mapping function, such as

#define mat_ptr(r,c) (*mat_ptr + ((r) *
                    (num_cols) + (c)))

With this, the assignment can be written as

mat_ptr(row,col) = x;

Other languages use different approaches to dealing with the problem of 

passing multidimensional arrays.

In Java and C#, arrays are objects. They are all single dimensioned, but the 
elements can be arrays. Each array inherits a named constant (length in Java 
and Length in C#) that is set to the length of the array when the array object 
is created. The formal parameter for a matrix appears with two sets of empty 
brackets, as in the following Java method:

float sumer(float mat[][]) {
   float sum = 0.0f;

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   388

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.5  Parameter-Passing Methods 

  389

   for (int row = 0; row < mat.length; row++) {
     for (int col = 0; col < mat[row].length; col++) {
       sum += mat[row][col];
     }  //** for (int row . . .
   } //** for (int col . . .
   return sum;
}

Because each array has its own length value, in a matrix the rows can have 
different lengths.

9.5.7  Design Considerations

Two  important  considerations  are  involved  in  choosing  parameter-passing 
methods: efficiency and whether one-way or two-way data transfer is needed.
Contemporary software-engineering principles dictate that access by sub-
program code to data outside the subprogram should be minimized. With this 
goal in mind, in-mode parameters should be used whenever no data are to be 
returned through parameters to the caller. Out-mode parameters should be 
used when no data are transferred to the called subprogram but the subprogram 
must transmit data back to the caller. Finally, inout-mode parameters should 
be used only when data must move in both directions between the caller and 
the called subprogram.

There is a practical consideration that is in conf lict with this principle. 
Sometimes it is justifiable to pass access paths for one-way parameter trans-
mission. For example, when a large array is to be passed to a subprogram that 
does not modify it, a one-way method may be preferred. However, pass-by-
value would require that the entire array be moved to a local storage area of 
the subprogram. This would be costly in both time and space. Because of this, 
large arrays are often passed by reference. This is precisely the reason why the 
Ada 83 definition allowed implementors to choose between the two methods 
for structured parameters. C++ constant reference parameters offer another 
solution. Another alternative approach would be to allow the user to choose 
between the methods.

The  choice  of  a  parameter-passing  method  for  functions  is  related 
to another design issue: functional side effects. This issue is discussed in 
Section 9.10.

9.5.8  Examples of Parameter Passing

Consider the following C function:

void swap1(int a, int b) {
  int temp = a;
  a = b;
  b = temp;
}

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   389

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
390 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

Suppose this function is called with

swap1(c, d);

Recall that C uses pass-by-value. The actions of swap1 can be described by the 
following pseudocode:

a = c        - Move first parameter value in
b = d        - Move second parameter value in
temp = a
a = b
b = temp

Although a ends up with d’s value and b ends up with c’s value, the values of c 
and d are unchanged because nothing is transmitted back to the caller.

We can modify the C swap function to deal with pointer parameters to 

achieve the effect of pass-by-reference:

void swap2(int *a, int *b) {
  int temp = *a;
  *a = *b;
  *b = temp;
}

swap2 can be called with

swap2(&c, &d);

The actions of swap2 can be described with the following:

a = &c       - Move first parameter address in
b = &d       - Move second parameter address in
temp = *a
*a = *b
*b = temp

In this case, the swap operation is successful: The values of  c and d are in 
fact interchanged. swap2 can be written in C++ using reference parameters as 
follows:

void swap2(int &a, int &b) {
   int  temp = a;
  a = b;
  b = temp;
}

This simple swap operation is not possible in Java, because it has neither 
pointers nor C++’s kind of references. In Java, a reference variable can point to 
only an object, not a scalar value.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   390

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.5  Parameter-Passing Methods 

  391

The  semantics  of  pass-by-value-result  is  identical  to  those  of  pass-by- 
reference, except when aliasing is involved. Ada uses pass-by-value-result for 
inout-mode scalar parameters. To explore pass-by-value-result, consider the 
following function, swap3, which we assume uses pass-by-value-result param-
eters. It is written in a syntax similar to that of Ada.

procedure swap3(a : in out Integer, b : in out Integer) is 
  temp : Integer;
   begin
   temp := a;
   a := b;
   b := temp;
   end swap3

Suppose swap3 is called with

swap3(c, d);

The actions of swap3 with this call are

addr_c = &c        - Move first parameter address in
addr_d = &d        - Move second parameter address in
a = *addr_c        - Move first parameter value in
b = *addr_d        - Move second parameter value in
temp = a
a = b
b = temp
*addr_c = a        - Move first parameter value out
*addr_d = b        - Move second parameter value out

So once again, this swap subprogram operates correctly. Next, consider the call

swap3(i, list[i]);

In this case, the actions are

addr_i = &i          - Move first parameter address in
addr_listi= &list[i] - Move second parameter address in
a = *addr_i          - Move first parameter value in
b = *addr_listi      - Move second parameter value in
temp = a
a = b
b = temp
*addr_i = a          - Move first parameter value out
*addr_listi = b      - Move second parameter value out

Again, the subprogram operates correctly, in this case because the addresses to 
which to return the values of the parameters are computed at the time of the 
call rather than at the time of the return. If the addresses of the actual param-
eters were computed at the time of the return, the results would be wrong.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   391

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
392 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

Finally, we must explore what happens when aliasing is involved with pass-
by-value-result and pass-by-reference. Consider the following skeletal program 
written in C-like syntax:

int i = 3; /* i is a global variable */
void fun(int a, int b) {
  i = b;
}
void main() {
  int list[10];
  list[i] = 5;
  fun(i, list[i]);
}

In fun, if pass-by-reference is used, i and a are aliases. If pass-by-value-result is 
used, i and a are not aliases. The actions of fun, assuming pass-by-value-result, 
are as follows:

addr_i = &i           - Move first parameter address in
addr_listi = &list[i] - Move second parameter address in
a = *addr_i           - Move first parameter value in
b = *addr_listi       - Move second parameter value in
i = b                 - Sets i to 5
*addr_i = a           - Move first parameter value out
*addr_listi = b       - Move second parameter value out

In this case, the assignment to the global i in fun changes its value from 3 to 
5, but the copy back of the first formal parameter (the second to last line in the 
example) sets it back to 3. The important observation here is that if pass-by- 
reference is used, the result is that the copy back is not part of the semantics, 
and i remains 5. Also note that because the address of the second parameter is 
computed at the beginning of fun, any change to the global i has no effect on 
the address used at the end to return the value of list[i].

9.6  Parameters That Are Subprograms

In programming, a number of situations occur that are most conveniently han-
dled if subprogram names can be sent as parameters to other subprograms. One 
common example of these occurs when a subprogram must sample some math-
ematical function. For example, a subprogram that does numerical integration 
estimates the area under the graph of a function by sampling the function at a 
number of different points. When such a subprogram is written, it should be 
usable for any given function; it should not need to be rewritten for every func-
tion that must be integrated. It is therefore natural that the name of a program 
function that evaluates the mathematical function to be integrated be sent to 
the integrating subprogram as a parameter.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   392

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.6  Parameters That Are Subprograms 

  393

Although the idea is natural and seemingly simple, the details of how it works 
can be confusing. If only the transmission of the subprogram code was necessary, 
it could be done by passing a single pointer. However, two complications arise.

First, there is the matter of type checking the parameters of the activations 
of the subprogram that was passed as a parameter. In C and C++, functions 
cannot be passed as parameters, but pointers to functions can. The type of a 
pointer to a function includes the function’s protocol. Because the protocol 
includes all parameter types, such parameters can be completely type checked.
The second complication with parameters that are subprograms appears 
only with languages that allow nested subprograms. The issue is what referenc-
ing environment for executing the passed subprogram should be used. There 
are three choices:

•  The environment of the call statement that enacts the passed subprogram 

(shallow binding)

•  The  environment  of  the  definition  of  the  passed  subprogram  (deep 

binding)

•  The environment of the call statement that passed the subprogram as an 

actual parameter (ad hoc binding)

The following example program, written with the syntax of JavaScript, 

illustrates these choices:

function sub1() {
  var x;
  function sub2() {
    alert(x); // Creates a dialog box with the value of x
    };
  function  sub3() {
    var  x;
    x = 3;
    sub4(sub2);
    };
  function  sub4(subx) {
    var  x;
    x = 4;
    subx();
    };
  x = 1;
  sub3();
  };

Consider the execution of sub2 when it is called in sub4. For shallow 
binding, the referencing environment of that execution is that of sub4, so the 
reference to x in sub2 is bound to the local x in sub4, and the output of the 
program is 4. For deep binding, the referencing environment of sub2’s exe-
cution is that of sub1, so the reference to x in sub2 is bound to the local x in 
sub1, and the output is 1. For ad hoc binding, the binding is to the local x in 
sub3, and the output is 3.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   393

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
394 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

histor y note

The original definition of  Pascal 
(Jensen and Wirth, 1974) 
allowed subprograms to be 
passed as parameters without 
including their parameter type 
information. If independent com-
pilation is possible (it was not 
possible in the original Pascal), 
the compiler is not even allowed 
to check for the correct number 
of parameters. In the absence of 
independent compilation, check-
ing for parameter consistency is 
possible but is a very complex 
task, and it usually is not done.

In some cases, the subprogram that declares a subprogram 
also passes that subprogram as a parameter. In those cases, deep 
binding and ad hoc binding are the same. Ad hoc binding has 
never been used because, one might surmise, the environment 
in which the procedure appears as a parameter has no natural 
connection to the passed subprogram.

Shallow  binding  is  not  appropriate  for  static-scoped  lan-
guages with nested subprograms. For example, suppose the pro-
cedure Sender passes the procedure Sent as a parameter to the 
procedure Receiver. The problem is that Receiver may not 
be in the static environment of Sent, thereby making it highly 
unnatural for Sent to have access to Receiver’s variables. On 
the other hand, it is perfectly normal in such a language for any 
subprogram, including one sent as a parameter, to have its refer-
encing environment determined by the lexical position of its defi-
nition. It is therefore more logical for these languages to use deep 
binding. Some dynamic-scoped languages use shallow binding.

9.7  Calling Subprograms Indirectly

There are situations in which subprograms must be called indirectly. These 
most often occur when the specific subprogram to be called is not known until 
run time. The call to the subprogram is made through a pointer or reference to 
the subprogram, which has been set during execution before the call is made. 
The two most common applications of indirect subprogram calls are for event 
handling in graphical user interfaces, which are now part of nearly all Web 
applications, as well as many non-Web applications, and for callbacks, in which 
a subprogram is called and instructed to notify the caller when the called sub-
program has completed its work. As always, our interest is not in these specific 
kinds of programming, but rather in programming language support for them.
The concept of calling subprograms indirectly is not a recently devel-
oped concept. C and C++ allow a program to define a pointer to a function, 
through which the function can be called. In C++, pointers to functions are 
typed according to the return type and parameter types of the function, so 
that such a pointer can point only at functions with one particular protocol. 
For example, the following declaration defines a pointer (pfun) that can point 
to any function that takes a float and an int as parameters and returns a 
float:

float (*pfun)(float,  int);

Any function with the same protocol as this pointer can be used as the initial 
value of this pointer or be assigned to the pointer in a program. In C and C++, 
a function name without following parentheses, like an array name without 

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   394

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.7  Calling Subprograms Indirectly 

  395

following brackets, is the address of the function (or array). So, both of the fol-
lowing are legal ways of giving an initial value or assigning a value to a pointer 
to a function:

int myfun2 (int, int);  // A function declaration
int (*pfun2)(int, int) = myfun2;  // Create a pointer and
                                   // initialize
                                   // it to point to myfun2
pfun2 = myfun2;  // Assigning a function's address to a
                 // pointer

The function myfun2 can now be called with either of the following statements:

(*pfun2)(first, second); pfun2(first, second);

The first of these explicitly dereferences the pointer pfun2, which is legal, but 
unnecessary.

The function pointers of C and C++ can be sent as parameters and returned 
from functions, although functions cannot be used directly in either of those 
roles.

In C#, the power and f lexibility of method pointers is increased by making 
them objects. These are called delegates, because instead of calling a method, 
a program delegates that action to a delegate.

To use a delegate, first the delegate class must be defined with a specific 
method protocol. An instantiation of a delegate holds the name of a method 
with the delegate’s protocol that it is able to call. The syntax of a declaration of 
a delegate is the same as that of a method declaration, except that the reserved 
word delegate is inserted just before the return type. For example, we could 
have the following:

public delegate int Change(int x);

This  delegate  can  be  instantiated  with  any  method  that  takes  an  int  as  a 
parameter and returns an int. For example, consider the following method 
declaration:

static int fun1(int x);

The  delegate  Change  can  be  instantiated  by  sending  the  name  of  this 

method to the delegate’s constructor, as in the following:

Change chgfun1 =  new  Change(fun1);

This can be shortened to the following:

Change chgfun1 = fun1;

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   395

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
396 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

Following is an example call to fun1 through the delegate chgfun1:

chgfun1(12);

Objects of a delegate class can store more than one method. A second 

method can be added using the operator +=, as in the following:

Change chgfun1 += fun2;

This places fun2 in the chgfun1 delegate, even if chgfun1 previously had 
the value null. All of the methods stored in a delegate instance are called in 
the order in which they were placed in the instance. This is called a multicast 
delegate. Regardless of what is returned by the methods, only the value or 
object returned by the last one called is returned. Of course, this means that 
in most cases, void is returned by the methods called through a multicast 
delegate.

In our example, a static method is placed in the delegate Change. Instance 
methods can also be called through a delegate, in which case the delegate must 
store a reference to the method. Delegates can also be generic.

Delegates are used for event handling by .NET applications. They are also 

used to implement closures (see Section 9.12).

As is the case with C and C++, the name of a function in Python without 
the following parentheses is a pointer to that function. Ada 95 has pointers to 
subprograms, but Java does not. In Python and Ruby, as well as most func-
tional languages, subprograms are treated like data, so they can be assigned 
to variables. Therefore, in these languages, there is little need for pointers to 
subprograms.

9.8  Design Issues for Functions

The following design issues are specific to functions:

•  Are side effects allowed?

•  What types of values can be returned?

•  How many values can be returned?

9.8.1  Functional Side Effects

Because of the problems of side effects of functions that are called in expres-
sions, as described in Chapter 5, parameters to functions should always be 
in-mode. In fact, some languages require this; for example, Ada functions can 
have only in-mode formal parameters. This requirement effectively prevents a 
function from causing side effects through its parameters or through aliasing of 
parameters and globals. In most other imperative languages, however, functions 

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   396

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.9  Overloaded Subprograms 

  397

can have either pass-by-value or pass-by-reference parameters, thus allowing 
functions that cause side effects and aliasing.

Pure functional languages, such as Haskell and Ruby, do not have variables, 

so their functions cannot have side effects.

9.8.2  Types of Returned Values

Most imperative programming languages restrict the types that can be returned by 
their functions. C allows any type to be returned by its functions except arrays and 
functions. Both of these can be handled by pointer type return values. C++ is like 
C but also allows user-defined types, or classes, to be returned from its functions. 
Ada, Python, and Ruby are the only languages among current imperative lan-
guages whose functions (and/or methods) can return values of any type. In the case 
of Ada, however, because functions are not types in Ada, they cannot be returned 
from functions. Of course, pointers to functions can be returned by functions.

In  some  programming  languages,  subprograms  are  first-class  objects, 
which means that they can be passed as parameters, returned from functions, 
and assigned to variables. Methods are first-class objects in some imperative 
languages, for example, Python and Ruby. The same is true for the functions 
in most functional languages.

Neither Java nor C# can have functions, although their methods are similar 
to functions. In both, any type or class can be returned by methods. Because 
methods are not types, they cannot be returned.

9.8.3  Number of Returned Values

In most languages, only a single value can be returned from a function. How-
ever, that is not always the case. Ruby allows the return of more than one value 
from a method. If a return statement in a Ruby method is not followed by 
an expression, nil is returned. If followed by one expression, the value of the 
expression is returned. If followed by more than one expression, an array of the 
values of all of the expressions is returned.

In ML, F#, and Python, and some other languages that include tuples, 

multiple values can be returned by placing them in a tuple.

9.9  Overloaded Subprograms

An overloaded operator is one that has multiple meanings. The meaning of a 
particular instance of an overloaded operator is determined by the types of its 
operands. For example, if the * operator has two f loating-point operands in a 
Java program, it specifies f loating-point multiplication. But if the same opera-
tor has two integer operands, it specifies integer multiplication.

An overloaded subprogram is a subprogram that has the same name as 
another subprogram in the same referencing environment. Every version of 

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   397

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
398 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

an overloaded subprogram must have a unique protocol; that is, it must be 
different from the others in the number, order, or types of its parameters, and 
possibly in its return type. The meaning of a call to an overloaded subpro-
gram is determined by the actual parameter list and/or possibly the type of the 
returned value. Although it is not necessary, overloaded subprograms usually 
implement the same process.

C++, Java, and C# include predefined overloaded subprograms. For exam-
ple, many classes in C++, Java, and C# have overloaded constructors. Because 
each version of an overloaded subprogram has a unique parameter profile, the 
compiler can disambiguate occurrences of calls to them by the different type 
parameters. Unfortunately, it is not that simple. Parameter coercions, when 
allowed, complicate the disambiguation process enormously. Simply stated, the 
issue is that if no method’s parameter profile matches the number and types of 
the actual parameters in a method call, but two or more methods have param-
eter profiles that can be matched through coercions, which method should be 
called? For a language designer to answer this question, he or she must decide 
how to rank all of the different coercions, so that the compiler can choose 
the method that “best” matches the call. This can be a complicated task. To 
understand the level of complexity of this process, we suggest the reader refer 
to the rules for disambiguation of method calls used in C++ (Stroustrup, 1997).
Because C++, Java, and C# allow mixed-mode expressions, the return type is 
irrelevant to disambiguation of overloaded functions (or methods). The context 
of the call does not allow the determination of the return type. For example, if a 
C++ program has two functions named fun and both take an int parameter but 
one returns an int and one returns a float, the program would not compile, 
because the compiler could not determine which version of fun should be used.
Users are also allowed to write multiple versions of subprograms with the 
same name in Java, C++, C#, and F#. Once again, in C++, Java, and C# the most 
common user-defined overloaded methods are constructors.

Overloaded subprograms that have default parameters can lead to ambig-

uous subprogram calls. For example, consider the following C++ code:

void fun(float b = 0.0);
void fun();
  . . .
  fun();

The call is ambiguous and will cause a compilation error.

9.10  Generic Subprograms

Software reuse can be an important contributor to software productivity. One 
way to increase the reusability of software is to lessen the need to create dif-
ferent subprograms that implement the same algorithm on different types of 
data. For example, a programmer should not need to write four different sort 
subprograms to sort four arrays that differ only in element type.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   398

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.10  Generic Subprograms 

  399

A polymorphic subprogram takes parameters of different types on dif-
ferent activations. Overloaded subprograms provide a particular kind of poly-
morphism called ad hoc polymorphism. Overloaded subprograms need not 
behave similarly.

Languages that support object-oriented programming usually support sub-
type polymorphism. Subtype polymorphism means that a variable of type T 
can access any object of type T or any type derived from T.

A  more  general  kind  of  polymorphism  is  provided  by  the  methods  of 
Python and Ruby. Recall that variables in these languages do not have types, 
so formal parameters do not have types. Therefore, a method will work for any 
type of actual parameter, as long as the operators used on the formal parameters 
in the method are defined.

Parametric polymorphism is provided by a subprogram that takes generic 
parameters  that  are  used  in  type  expressions  that  describe  the  types  of  the 
parameters of the subprogram. Different instantiations of such subprograms 
can be given different generic parameters, producing subprograms that take 
different types of parameters. Parametric definitions of subprograms all behave 
the same. Parametrically polymorphic subprograms are often called generic  
subprograms. C++, Java 5.0+, C# 2005+, and F# provide a kind of compile-time 
parametric polymorphism.

9.10.1  Generic Functions in C++

Generic functions in C++ have the descriptive name of template functions. The 
definition of a template function has the general form

template <template parameters>
—a function definition that may include the template parameters

A template parameter (there must be at least one) has one of the forms

class identifier
typename identifier

The class form is used for type names. The typename form is used for passing 
a value to the template function. For example, it is sometimes convenient to 
pass an integer value for the size of an array in the template function.

A template can take another template, in practice often a template class 
that defines a user-defined generic type, as a parameter, but we do not consider 
that option here.8

As an example of a template function, consider the following:

template <class Type>
Type max(Type first, Type second) {
  return  first > second ? first : second;
}

8.  Template classes are discussed in Chapter 11.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   399

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
400 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

where Type is the parameter that specifies the type of data on which the func-
tion will operate. This template function can be instantiated for any type for 
which the operator > is defined. For example, if it were instantiated with int 
as the parameter, it would be

int max(int  first, int second) {
  return first > second ? first : second;
}

Although this process could be defined as a macro, a macro would have the 
disadvantage of not operating correctly if the parameters were expressions with 
side effects. For example, suppose the macro were defined as

#define max(a, b) ((a) > (b)) ? (a) : (b)

This  definition  is  generic  in  the  sense  that  it  works  for  any  numeric  type. 
However, it does not always work correctly if called with a parameter that has 
a side effect, such as

max(x++, y)

which produces

((x++) > (y) ? (x++) : (y))

Whenever the value of x is greater than that of y, x will be incremented twice.
C++ template functions are instantiated implicitly either when the func-
tion is named in a call or when its address is taken with the & operator. For 
example, the example template function max would be instantiated twice by 
the following code segment—once for int type parameters and once for char 
type parameters:

int a, b, c;
char d, e, f;
. . .
c = max(a, b);
f = max(d, e);

The following is a C++ generic sort subprogram:

template <class Type>
void generic_sort(Type list[], int len) {
  int top, bottom;
  Type temp;
  for (top = 0; top < len - 2; top++)
    for (bottom = top + 1; bottom < len - 1; bottom++)
      if (list[top] > list[bottom]) {
        temp = list[top];

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   400

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.10  Generic Subprograms 

  401

        list[top] = list[bottom];
        list[bottom] = temp;
      }  //** end of if (list[top] . . .
}  //** end of generic_sort

The following is an example instantiation of this template function:

float flt_list[100];
. . .
generic_sort(flt_list, 100);

The templated functions of C++ are a kind of poor cousin to a subprogram 
in which the types of the formal parameters are dynamically bound to the types 
of the actual parameters in a call. In this case, only a single copy of the code 
is needed, whereas with the C++ approach, a copy must be created at compile 
time for each different type that is required and the binding of subprogram 
calls to subprograms is static.

9.10.2  Generic Methods in Java 5.0

Support for generic types and methods was added to Java in Java 5.0. The name 
of a generic class in Java 5.0 is specified by a name followed by one or more 
type variables delimited by pointed brackets. For example,

generic_class<T>

where  T is the type variable. Generic types are discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 11.

Java’s generic methods differ from the generic subprograms of C++ in 
several important ways. First, generic parameters must be classes—they can-
not be primitive types. This requirement disallows a generic method that 
mimics  our  example  in  C++,  in  which  the  component  types  of  arrays  are 
generic and can be primitives. In Java, the components of arrays (as opposed 
to containers) cannot be generic. Second, although Java generic methods can 
be instantiated any number of times, only one copy of the code is built. The 
internal version of a generic method, which is called a raw method, operates 
on Object class objects. At the point where the generic value of a generic 
method is returned, the compiler inserts a cast to the proper type. Third, in 
Java, restrictions can be specified on the range of classes that can be passed 
to the generic method as generic parameters. Such restrictions are called 
bounds.

As an example of a generic Java 5.0 method, consider the following skeletal 

method definition:

public static  <T> T doIt(T[] list) {
  . . .
}

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   401

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
402 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

This defines a method named doIt that takes an array of elements of a generic 
type. The name of the generic type is T and it must be an array. Following is 
an example call to doIt:

doIt<string>(myList);

Now, consider the following version of doIt, which has a bound on its 

generic parameter:

public static <T extends Comparable> T doIt(T[] list) {
  . . .
}

This defines a method that takes a generic array parameter whose elements are 
of a class that implements the Comparable interface. That is the restriction, or 
bound, on the generic parameter. The reserved word extends seems to imply 
that the generic class subclasses the following class. In this context, however, 
extends has a different meaning. The expression <T extends BoundingType> 
specifies that T should be a “subtype” of the bounding type. So, in this context, 
extends means the generic class (or interface) either extends the bounding class 
(the bound if it is a class) or implements the bounding interface (if the bound is 
an interface). The bound ensures that the elements of any instantiation of the 
generic can be compared with the Comparable method, compareTo.

If a generic method has two or more restrictions on its generic type, they 
are added to the extends clause, separated by ampersands (&). Also, generic 
methods can have more than one generic parameter.

Java 5.0 supports wildcard types. For example, Collection<?> is a wildcard 
type for collection classes. This type can be used for any collection type of any 
class components. For example, consider the following generic method:

void  printCollection(Collection<?> c) {
   for  (Object e: c) {
     System.out.println(e);
  }
}

This method prints the elements of any Collection class, regardless of the 
class of its components. Some care must be taken with objects of the wildcard 
type. For example, because the components of a particular object of this type 
have a type, other type objects cannot be added to the collection. For example, 
consider

Collection<?> c = new ArrayList<String>();

It would be illegal to use the add method to put something into this collection 
unless its type were String.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   402

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.10  Generic Subprograms 

  403

Wildcard types can be restricted, as is the case with nonwildcard types. 
Such types are called bounded wildcard types. For example, consider the following 
method header:

public void drawAll(ArrayList<? extends Shape> things)

The generic type here is a wildcard type that is a subclass of the Shape class. 
This method could be written to draw any object whose type is a subclass of 
Shape.

9.10.3  Generic Methods in C# 2005

The generic methods of C# 2005 are similar in capability to those of Java 5.0, 
except there is no support for wildcard types. One unique feature of C# 2005 
generic methods is that the actual type parameters in a call can be omitted if the 
compiler can infer the unspecified type. For example, consider the following 
skeletal class definition:

class MyClass {
  public static  T DoIt<T>(T p1) {
    . . .
  }
}

The method DoIt can be called without specifying the generic parameter if the 
compiler can infer the generic type from the actual parameter in the call. For 
example, both of the following calls are legal:

int myInt = MyClass.DoIt(17);  // Calls DoIt<int>
string myStr = MyClass.DoIt('apples');
    // Calls DoIt<string>

9.10.4  Generic Functions in F#

The type inferencing system of F# is not always able to determine the type of 
parameters or the return type of a function. When this is the case, for some 
functions F# infers a generic type for the parameters and the return value. 
This is called automatic generalization. For example, consider the following 
function definition:

let getLast (a, b, c) = c;;

Because no type information was included, the types of the parameters and 
the return value are all inferred to be generic. Because this function does not 
include any computations, this is a simple generic function.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   403

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
404 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

Functions can be defined to have generic parameters, as in the following 

example:

let printPair (x: 'a) (y: 'a) =
   printfn "%A %A" x y;;

The %A format specification is for any type. The apostrophe in front of the 
type  named  a  specifies  it  to  be  a  generic  type.9   This  function  definition 
works (with generic parameters) because no type-constrained operation is 
included. Arithmetic operators are examples of type-constrained operations. 
For example, consider the following function definition:

let adder x y = x + y;;

Type inferencing sets the type of x and y and the return value to int. Because 
there is no type coercion in F#, the following call is illegal:

adder 2.5 3.6;;

Even if the type of the parameters were set to be generic, the + operator would 
cause the types of x and y to be int.

The generic type could also be specified explicitly in angle brackets, as in 

the following:

let printPair2<'T> x y =
    printfn "%A %A" x y;;

This function must be called with a type,10  as in the following:

printPair2<float> 3.5 2.4;;

Because of type inferencing and the lack of type coercions, F# generic 
functions are far less useful, especially for numeric computations, than those 
of C+ +, Java 5.0+ , and C# 2005+.

9.11  User-Defined Overloaded Operators

Operators can be overloaded by the user in Ada, C++, Python, and Ruby. Sup-
pose that a Python class is developed to support complex numbers and arith-
metic operations on them. A complex number can be represented with two 
f loating-point values. The Complex class would have members for these two 

9.  There is nothing special about a—it could be any legal identifier. By convention, lowercase 

letters at the beginning of the alphabet are used.

10.  Convention explicitly states that generic types are named with uppercase letters starting at T.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   404

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
9.12  Closures 

  405

named real and imag. In Python, binary arithmetic operations are imple-
mented as method calls sent to the first operand, sending the second operand 
as a parameter. For addition, the method is named __add__. For example, the 
expression x  +  y is implemented as x.__add__(y). To overload + for the 
addition of objects of the new Complex class, we only need to provide  Complex 
with a method named __add__ that performs the operation. Following is such 
a method:

def __add__ (self, second):
  return Complex(self.real + second.real, self.imag +
   second.imag)

In most languages that support object-oriented programming, a reference to 
the current object is implicitly sent with each method call. In Python, this ref-
erence must be sent explicitly; that is the reason why self is the first parameter 
to our method, __add__.

The example add method could be written for a complex class in C++ as 

follows11 :

Complex operator +(Complex &second) {
  return  Complex(real + second.real, imag + second.imag);
}

9.12  Closures

Defining a closure is a simple matter; a closure is a subprogram and the ref-
erencing environment where it was defined. The referencing environment is 
needed if the subprogram can be called from any arbitrary place in the pro-
gram. Explaining a closure is not so simple.

If a static-scoped programming language does not allow nested subpro-
grams, closures are not useful, so such languages do not support them. All 
of the variables in the referencing environment of a subprogram in such a 
 language (its local variables and the global variables) are accessible, regardless 
of the place in the program where the subprogram is called.

When subprograms can be nested, in addition to locals and globals, the 
referencing environment of a subprogram can include variables defined in all 
enclosing subprograms. However, this is not an issue if the subprogram can be 
called only in places where all of the enclosing scopes are active and visible. It 
becomes an issue if a subprogram can be called elsewhere. This can happen if 
the subprogram can be passed as a parameter or assigned to a variable, thereby 
allowing it to be called from virtually anywhere in the program. There is an 
associated problem: The subprogram could be called after one or more of its 

11.  Both C++ and Python have predefined classes for complex numbers, so our example methods 

are unnecessary, except as illustrations.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   405

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
406 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

nesting subprograms has terminated, which normally means that the variables 
defined in such nesting subprograms have been deallocated—they no longer 
exist. For the subprogram to be callable from anywhere in the program, its 
referencing environment must be available wherever it might be called. There-
fore, the variables defined in nesting subprograms may need lifetimes that are 
of the entire program, rather than just the time during which the subprogram 
in which they were defined is active. A variable whose lifetime is that of the 
whole program is said to have unlimited extent. This usually means they must 
be heap dynamic, rather than stack dynamic.

Nearly all functional programming languages, most scripting languages, 
and at least one primarily imperative language, C#, support closures. These 
languages are static-scoped, allow nested subprograms,12  and allow subpro-
grams to be passed as parameters. Following is an example of a closure written 
in JavaScript:

function makeAdder(x) {
    return function(y) {return x + y;}
}
. . .
var add10 = makeAdder(10);
var add5 = makeAdder(5);
document.write("Add 10 to 20: " + add10(20) +
"<br />");
document.write("Add 5 to 20: " + add5(20) +
"<br />");

The output of this code, assuming it was embedded in an HTML document 
and displayed with a browser, is as follows:

Add 10 to 20: 30
Add 5 to 20: 25

In this example, the closure is the anonymous function defined inside the 
makeAdder function, which makeAdder returns. The variable x referenced in 
the closure function is bound to the parameter that was sent to  makeAdder. 
The makeAdder function is called twice, once with a parameter of 10 and 
once with 5. Each of these calls returns a different version of the closure 
because they are bound to different values of x. The first call to makeAdder 
creates a function that adds 10 to its parameter; the second creates a function 
that adds 5 to its parameter. The two versions of the function are bound to 
different activations of makeAdder. Obviously, the lifetime of the version 

12.  In C#, the only methods that can be nested are anonymous delegates and lambda 

expressions.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   406

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
 
9.13  Coroutines 

  407

of x created when makeAdder is called must extend over the lifetime of the 
program.

This same closure function can be written in C# using a nested anonymous 
delegate. The type of the nesting method is specified to be a function that takes 
an int as a parameter and returns an anonymous delegate. The return type is 
specified with the special notation for such delegates, Func<int, int>. The 
first type in the angle brackets is the parameter type. Such a delegate can encap-
sulate methods that have only one parameter. The second type is the return 
type of the method encapsulated by the delegate.

static Func<int, int> makeAdder(int x) {
  return delegate(int y) { return x + y;};
}
. . .
Func<int, int> Add10 = makeAdder(10);
Func<int, int> Add5 = makeAdder(5);
Console.WriteLine("Add 10 to 20: {0}", Add10(20));
Console.WriteLine("Add 5 to 20: {0}", Add5(20));

The output of this code is exactly the same as for the previous JavaScript clo-
sure example.

The anonymous delegate could have been written as a lambda expression. 
The following is a replacement for the body of the makeAdder method, using 
a lambda expression instead of the delegate:

return y => x + y

Ruby’s blocks are implemented so that they can reference variables vis-
ible in the position in which they were defined, even if they are called at a 
place in which those variables would have disappeared. This makes such blocks 
closures.

9.13  Coroutines

A coroutine is a special kind of subprogram. Rather than the master-slave 
relationship between a caller and a called subprogram that exists with conven-
tional subprograms, caller and called coroutines are more equitable. In fact, 
the coroutine control mechanism is often called the symmetric unit control 
model.

Coroutines can have multiple entry points, which are controlled by the 
coroutines  themselves.  They  also  have  the  means  to  maintain  their  status 
between activations. This means that coroutines must be history sensitive and 
thus have static local variables. Secondary executions of a coroutine often begin 
at points other than its beginning. Because of this, the invocation of a coroutine 
is called a resume rather than a call.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   407

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
408 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

For example, consider the following skeletal coroutine:

sub co1(){
  . . .
  resume  co2();
  . . .
  resume  co3();
  . . .
}

The first time co1 is resumed, its execution begins at the first statement 
and executes down to and including the resume of co2, which transfers control 
to co2. The next time co1 is resumed, its execution begins at the first statement 
after its call to co2. When co1 is resumed the third time, its execution begins 
at the first statement after the resume of co3.

One of the usual characteristics of subprograms is maintained in corou-

tines: Only one coroutine is actually in execution at a given time.

As seen in the example above, rather than executing to its end, a coroutine 
often partially executes and then transfers control to some other coroutine, and 
when restarted, a coroutine resumes execution just after the statement it used 
to transfer control elsewhere. This sort of interleaved execution sequence is 
related to the way multiprogramming operating systems work. Although there 
may be only one processor, all of the executing programs in such a system 
appear to run concurrently while sharing the processor. In the case of corou-
tines, this is sometimes called quasi-concurrency.

Typically,  coroutines  are  created  in  an  application  by  a  program  unit 
called the master unit, which is not a coroutine. When created, coroutines 
execute their initialization code and then return control to that master unit. 
When the entire family of coroutines is constructed, the master program 
resumes one of the coroutines, and the members of the family of coroutines 
then resume each other in some order until their work is completed, if in fact 
it can be completed. If the execution of a coroutine reaches the end of its code 
section, control is transferred to the master unit that created it. This is the 
mechanism for ending execution of the collection of coroutines, when that 
is desirable. In some programs, the coroutines run whenever the computer 
is running.

One example of a problem that can be solved with this sort of collection of 
coroutines is a card game simulation. Suppose the game has four players who 
all use the same strategy. Such a game can be simulated by having a master 
program unit create a family of four coroutines, each with a collection, or hand, 
of cards. The master program could then start the simulation by resuming one 
of the player coroutines, which, after it had played its turn, could resume the 
next player coroutine, and so forth until the game ended.

Suppose program units A and B are coroutines. Figure 9.3 shows two ways 

an execution sequence involving A and B might proceed.

In Figure 9.3a, the execution of coroutine A is started by the master unit. 
After some execution, A starts B. When coroutine B in Figure 9.3a first causes 

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   408

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
9.13  Coroutines 

  409

Figure 9.3

Two possible execution 
control sequences for 
two coroutines without 
loops

resume
from master

A

•
•
•
resume B
•
•
•
resume B

A

•
•
resume B
•
•
•
resume B
•
•
•
•
resume B

(a)

resume
from master

B

•
•
resume A
•
•
•
•
resume A
•
•
•
•

B

•
•
•
•
resume A
•
•
•
•
•
resume A
•
•
•

Figure 9.4

Coroutine execution 
sequence with loops

resume
from master

(b)

A

.
•
.
•
.
•
.
•
.
•
.
•
resume B
.
•
.
•
.
•
.
•
.
•

First resume

Subsequent
resume

B

.
•
.
•
.
•
.
•
.
•
.
•
.
•
.
•
resume A
.
•
.
•
.
•

control to return to coroutine A, the semantics is that A continues from where 
it ended its last execution. In particular, its local variables have the values left 
them by the previous activation. Figure 9.3b shows an alternative execution 
sequence of coroutines A and B. In this case, B is started by the master unit.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   409

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
410 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

Rather than have the patterns shown in Figure 9.3, a coroutine often has 
a loop containing a resume. Figure 9.4 shows the execution sequence of this 
scenario. In this case, A is started by the master unit. Inside its main loop, A 
resumes B, which in turn resumes A in its main loop.

The generators of Python are a form of coroutines.13 

S U M M A R Y

Process abstractions are represented in programming languages by subprograms. 
A subprogram definition describes the actions represented by the subprogram. 
A subprogram call enacts those actions. A subprogram header identifies a sub-
program definition and provides its interface, which is called its protocol.

Formal parameters are the names that subprograms use to refer to the 
actual parameters given in subprogram calls. In Python and Ruby, array and 
hash formal parameters are used to support variable numbers of parameters. 
JavaScript also supports variable numbers of parameters. Actual parameters can 
be associated with formal parameters by position or by keyword. Parameters 
can have default values.

Subprograms can be either functions, which model mathematical func-
tions and are used to define new operations, or procedures, which define new 
statements.

Local variables in subprograms can be stack dynamic, providing support 
for recursion, or static, providing efficiency and history-sensitive local variables.
JavaScript, Python, Ruby, and Swift allow subprogram definitions to be 

nested.

There are three fundamental semantics models of parameter passing—in 
mode, out mode, and inout mode—and a number of approaches to imple-
ment  them.  These  are  pass-by-value,  pass-by-result,  pass-by-value-result, 
pass-by-reference, and pass-by-name. In most languages, parameters are passed 
in the run-time stack.

Aliasing  can  occur  when  pass-by-reference  parameters  are  used,  both 
among two or more parameters and between a parameter and an accessible 
nonlocal variable.

Parameters that are multidimensioned arrays pose some issues for the lan-
guage designer, because the called subprogram needs to know how to compute 
the storage mapping function for them. This requires more than just the name 
of the array.

Parameters that are subprogram names provide a necessary service but can 
be difficult to understand. The opacity lies in the referencing environment that 
is available when a subprogram that has been passed as a parameter is executed.

13.  However, the generators of Python are a form of coroutines.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   410

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
 
Review Questions 

  411

C and C++ support pointers to functions. C# has delegates, which are 
objects that can store references to methods. Delegates can support multicast 
calls by storing more than one method reference.

Ada, C++, C#, Ruby, and Python allow both subprogram and operator 
overloading. Subprograms can be overloaded as long as the various versions can 
be disambiguated by the types of their parameters or returned values. Function 
definitions can be used to build additional meanings for operators.

Subprograms in C++, Java 5.0, and C# 2005 can be generic, using paramet-
ric polymorphism, so the desired types of their data objects can be passed to the 
compiler, which then can construct units for the requested types.

The designer of a function facility in a language must decide what restric-
tions will be placed on the returned values, as well as the number of return values.
A closure is a subprogram and its referencing environment. Closures are 
useful in languages that allow nested subprograms, are static-scoped, and allow 
subprograms to be returned from functions and assigned to variables.

A coroutine is a special subprogram that has multiple entries. It can be used 

to provide interleaved execution of subprograms.

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  What are the three general characteristics of subprograms?

2.  What does it mean for a subprogram to be active?

3.  What is given in the header of a subprogram?

4.  What characteristic of Python subprograms sets them apart from those 

of other languages?

5.  What languages allow a variable number of parameters?

6.  What is a Ruby array formal parameter?

7.  What is a parameter profile? What is a subprogram protocol?

8.  What are formal parameters? What are actual parameters?

9.  What are the advantages and disadvantages of keyword parameters?

10.  What are the differences between a function and a procedure?

11.  What are the design issues for subprograms?

12.  What are the advantages and disadvantages of dynamic local variables?

13.  What are the advantages and disadvantages of static local variables?

14.  What languages allow subprogram definitions to be nested?

15.  What are the three semantics models of parameter passing?
16.  What are the modes, the conceptual models of transfer, the advantages, 
and the disadvantages of pass-by-value, pass-by-result, pass-by-value-
result, and pass-by-reference parameter-passing methods?

17.  Describe the ways that aliases can occur with pass-by-reference parameters.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   411

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
412 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

18.  What is the difference between the way original C and C89 deal with an 
actual parameter whose type is not identical to that of the corresponding 
formal parameter?

19.  What are two fundamental design considerations for parameter-passing 

methods?

20.  Describe the problem of passing multidimensioned arrays as 

parameters.

21.  What is the name of the parameter-passing method used in Ruby?

22.  What are the two issues that arise when subprogram names are 

parameters?

23.  Define shallow and deep binding for referencing environments of 

subprograms that have been passed as parameters.

24.  What is an overloaded subprogram?

25.  What is parametric polymorphism?

26.  What causes a C++ template function to be instantiated?

27.  In what fundamental ways do the generic parameters to a Java 5.0 

generic method differ from those of C++ methods?

28.  If a Java 5.0 method returns a generic type, what type of object is actually 

returned?

29.  If a Java 5.0 generic method is called with three different generic 

parameters, how many versions of the method will be generated by the 
compiler?

30.  What are the design issues for functions?

31.  Name two languages that allow multiple values to be returned from a 

function.

32.  What exactly is a delegate?

33.  What is the main drawback of generic functions in F#?

34.  What is a closure?

35.  What are the language characteristics that make closures useful?

36.  What languages allow the user to overload operators?

37.  In what ways are coroutines different from conventional subprograms?

P R O B L E M   S E T

1.  What are arguments for and against a user program building additional 
definitions for existing operators, as can be done in Python and C++? 
Do you think such user-defined operator overloading is good or bad? 
Support your answer.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   412

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
Problem Set 

  413

2.  In most Fortran IV implementations, all parameters were passed by 

reference, using access path transmission only. State both the advantages 
and disadvantages of this design choice.

3.  Argue in support of the Ada 83 designers’ decision to allow the 

implementor to choose between implementing inout-mode parameters 
by copy or by reference.

4.  Suppose you want to write a method that prints a heading on a new 

output page, along with a page number that is 1 in the first activation 
and that increases by 1 with each subsequent activation. Can this be done 
without parameters and without reference to nonlocal variables in Java? 
Can it be done in C#?

5.  Consider the following program written in C syntax:

void swap(int a, int b) {
  int temp;
  temp = a;
  a = b;
  b = temp;
}
void main() {
  int value = 2, list[5] = {1, 3, 5, 7, 9};
  swap(value, list[0]);
  swap(list[0], list[1]);
  swap(value, list[value]);
}

For each of the following parameter-passing methods, what are all of the 
values of the variables value and list after each of the three calls to 
swap?

a.  Passed by value
b.  Passed by reference
c.  Passed by value-result

6.  Present one argument against providing both static and dynamic local 

variables in subprograms.

7.  Consider the following program written in C syntax:

void fun (int first, int second) {
  first += first;
  second += second;
}
void main() {
  int list[2] = {1, 3};
  fun(list[0], list[1]);
}

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   413

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
414 

  Chapter 9  

 Subprograms

For each of the following parameter-passing methods, what are the 
values of the list array after execution?

a.  Passed by value
b.  Passed by reference
c.  Passed by value-result

8.  Argue against the C design of providing only function subprograms.

9.  From a textbook on Fortran, learn the syntax and semantics of statement 

functions. Justify their existence in Fortran.

10.  Study the methods of user-defined operator overloading in C++ and Ada, 
and write a report comparing the two using our criteria for evaluating 
languages.

11.  C# supports out-mode parameters, but neither Java nor C++ does. 

Explain the difference.

12.  Research Jensen’s Device, which was a use of pass-by-name parameters, 

and write a short description of what it is and how it can be used.

13.  Study the iterator mechanisms of Ruby and CLU and list their 

similarities and differences.

14.  Speculate on the issue of allowing nested subprograms in programming 
languages—why are they not allowed in many contemporary languages?

15.  What are at least two arguments against the use of pass-by-name 

parameters?

16.  Write a detailed comparison of the generic subprograms of Java 5.0 and 

C# 2005.

P R O G R A M M I N G   E X E R C I S E S

1.  Write a program in a language that you know to determine the ratio of 

the time required to pass a large array by reference and the time required 
to pass the same array by value. Make the array as large as possible on 
the machine and implementation you use. Pass the array as many times 
as necessary to get reasonably accurate timings of the passing operations.

2.  Write a C# or Ada program that determines when the address of an out-
mode parameter is computed (at the time of the call or at the time the 
execution of the subprogram finishes).

3.  Write a Perl program that passes by reference a literal to a subprogram, 

which attempts to change the parameter. Given the overall design 
philosophy of Perl, explain the results.
4.  Repeat Programming Exercise 3 in C#.
5.  Write a program in some language that has both static and stack-dynamic 
local variables in subprograms. Create six large (at least 100 * 100) 

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   414

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
 
Programming Exercises 

  415

matrices in the subprogram—three static and three stack dynamic. Fill 
two of the static matrices and two of the stack-dynamic matrices with 
random numbers in the range of 1 to 100. The code in the subprogram 
must perform a large number of matrix multiplication operations on the 
static matrices and time the process. Then it must repeat this with the 
stack-dynamic matrices. Compare and explain the results.

6.  Write a C# program that includes two methods that are called a large 
number of times. Both methods are passed a large array, one by value 
and one by reference. Compare the times required to call these two 
methods and explain the difference. Be sure to call them a sufficient 
number of times to illustrate a difference in the required time.

7.  Write a program, using the syntax of whatever language you like, that 

produces different behavior depending on whether pass-by-reference or 
pass-by-value-result is used in its parameter passing.

8.  Write a generic C++ function that takes an array of generic elements 

and a scalar of the same type as the array elements. The type of the array 
elements and the scalar is the generic parameter. The function must 
search the given array for the given scalar and return the subscript of 
the scalar in the array. If the scalar is not in the array, the function must 
return -1. Test the function for int and float types.

9.  Devise a subprogram and calling code in which pass-by-reference and 
pass-by-value-result of one or more parameters produces different 
results.

M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   415

1/5/18   10:47 PM

 
 
 
M09_SEBE8029_12_SE_C09.indd   416

1/5/18   10:47 PM
