# Fuente
- archivo: 507-556.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/Robert W. Sebesta - Concepts of Programming Languages-Pearson (2019)/507-556.pdf
- extraido: 2026-03-26T16:13:28

# Contenido

12 

Support for Object- 
Oriented Programming

 12.1  Introduction

 12.2  Object-Oriented Programming

 12.3  Design Issues for Object-Oriented Languages

 12.4  Support for Object-Oriented Programming in Specific 

Languages

 12.5  Implementation of Object-Oriented Constructs

 12.6  Reflection

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   483

1/5/18   10:54 PM

483

484 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

T his chapter begins with a brief introduction to object-oriented programming, 

followed by an extended discussion of the primary design issues for inheritance 
and dynamic binding. Next, the support for object-oriented programming in 

Smalltalk, C++, Java, C#, and Ruby is discussed. Following this is a short overview of 
the implementation of dynamic bindings of method calls to methods in object-oriented 
languages. The last section discusses reflection.

12.1  Introduction

Languages  that  support  object-oriented  programming  now  are  firmly 
entrenched in the mainstream. From COBOL to LISP, including virtually 
every language in between, dialects that support object-oriented programming 
have appeared. C++ supports procedural and data-oriented programming, in 
addition to object-oriented programming. CLOS, an object-oriented version 
of LISP (Paepeke, 1993), also supports functional programming. Some of the 
newer languages that were designed to support object-oriented programming 
do not support other programming paradigms but still employ some of the 
basic imperative structures and have the appearance of the older imperative 
languages. Among these are Java and C#. Ruby is challenging to categorize: 
It is a pure object-oriented language in the sense that all data are objects, but 
it is a hybrid language in that one can use it for procedural programming. 
Finally, there is the pure object-oriented but somewhat unconventional lan-
guage: Smalltalk. Smalltalk was the first language to offer complete support 
for object-oriented programming. The details of support for object-oriented 
programming vary widely among languages, and that is the primary topic of 
this chapter.

This chapter relies heavily on Chapter 11. It is in fact a continuation of that 
chapter. This relationship ref lects the reality that object-oriented program-
ming is, in essence, an application of the principle of abstraction to abstract 
data types. Specifically, in object-oriented programming, the commonality of 
a collection of similar abstract data types is factored out and put in a new type. 
The members of the collection inherit these common parts from that new type. 
This feature is inheritance, which is at the center of object-oriented program-
ming and the languages that support it.

The  other  characterizing  feature  of  object-oriented  programming, 
dynamic binding of method calls to methods, is also extensively discussed in 
this chapter.

Although object-oriented programming is supported by some of the func-
tional languages, for example, CLOS, OCaml, and F#, those languages are not 
discussed in this chapter.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   484

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
12.2  Object-Oriented Programming 

  485

12.2  Object-Oriented Programming

12.2.1 

Introduction

The concept of object-oriented programming had its roots in SIMULA 67 
but was not fully developed1 until the evolution of Smalltalk resulted in Small-
talk 80 (in 1980, of course). Indeed, some consider Smalltalk to be the base 
model for a purely object-oriented programming language. A language that is 
object oriented must provide support for three key language features: abstract 
data  types,  inheritance,  and  dynamic  binding  of  method  calls  to  methods. 
Abstract data types were discussed in detail in Chapter 11, so this chapter 
focuses on inheritance and dynamic binding.

12.2.2 

Inheritance

There has long been pressure on software developers to increase their produc-
tivity. This pressure has been intensified by the continuing reduction in the 
cost of computer hardware. By the middle to late 1980s, it became apparent 
to many software developers that one of the most promising opportunities for 
increased productivity in their profession was in software reuse. Abstract data 
types, with their encapsulation and access controls, are obvious candidates for 
reuse. The problem with the reuse of abstract data types is that, in nearly all 
cases, the features and capabilities of the existing type are not quite right for the 
new use. The old type requires at least some minor modifications. Such modifi-
cations can be difficult, because they require the person doing the modification 
to understand part, if not all, of the existing code. In many cases, the person 
doing the modification is not the program’s original author. Furthermore, the 
modifications often require changes to all client programs.

A second problem with programming with abstract data types is that the 
type definitions are all independent and are at the same level.2 This design often 
makes it impossible to organize a program to match the problem space being 
addressed by the program. In many cases, the underlying problem has catego-
ries of objects that are related, both as siblings (being similar to each other) and 
as parents and children (having a descendant relationship).

Inheritance  offers  a  solution  to  both  the  modification  problem  posed 
by abstract data type reuse and the program organization problem. If a new 
abstract data type can inherit the data and functionality of some existing type, 
and is also allowed to modify some of those entities and add new entities, 
reuse is greatly facilitated without requiring changes to the reused abstract data 
type. Programmers can begin with an existing abstract data type and design 
a modified descendant of it to fit a new problem requirement. Furthermore, 

1.  Although SIMULA 67 had classes, the members defined inside them were not hidden from 

outside code.

2.  This is similar to the functions in a C program, which are also independent and at a single level.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   485

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
 
486 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

inheritance provides a framework for the definition of hierarchies of related 
classes that can ref lect the descendant relationships in the problem space.

The abstract data types in object-oriented languages, following the lead of 
SIMULA 67, are usually called classes. As with instances of abstract data types, 
class instances are called objects. A class that is defined through inheritance 
from another class is a derived class, a subclass, or a child class. A class from 
which the new class is derived is its base class, superclass, or parent class. 
The subprograms that define the operations on objects of a class are called 
methods. The calls to methods are sometimes called messages. The entire 
collection of methods of a class is called the message protocol, or message 
interface, of the class. Computations in an object-oriented program are speci-
fied by messages sent from objects to other objects, or in some cases, to classes.
Methods are similar to subprograms. Both are collections of code that 

perform some computation. Both can take parameters and return results.

Passing a message is different from calling a subprogram. A subprogram 
typically processes data that is either passed to it by its caller as a parameter 
or is accessed nonlocally or globally. A message that is sent to an object is a 
request to execute one of its methods. At least some of the data on which the 
method is to operate is part of the object itself. Objects have methods that 
define processes the object can perform on itself. Because the objects are of 
abstract data types, these should be the only ways to manipulate data of the 
object. A subprogram defines a process that it can perform on any data sent to 
it (or made available nonlocally or globally).

As a simple example of inheritance, consider the following: Suppose we 
have a class named Vehicles, which has variables for year, color, and make. A 
natural specialization, or subclass, of this would be Truck, which could inherit 
the variables from Vehicle, but would add variables for hauling capacity and 
number of wheels. Figure 12.1 shows a simple diagram to indicate the rela-
tionship between the Vehicle class and the Truck class, in which the arrow 
points to the parent class.

There are several ways a derived class can differ from its parent.3 Following 

are the most common differences between a parent class and its subclasses:

1.  The subclass can add variables and/or methods to those inherited from 

the parent class.

2.  The subclass can modify the behavior of one or more of its inherited 
methods. A modified method has the same name, and often the same 
protocol, as the one of which it is a modification.

Figure 12.1

A simple example of 
inheritance

Vehicle

Truck

3.  If a subclass does not differ from its parent, it obviously serves no purpose.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   486

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
 
12.2  Object-Oriented Programming 

  487

3.  The parent class can define some of its variables or methods to have 
private access, which means they will not be visible in the subclass.

The new method is said to override the inherited method, which is then 
called an overridden method. The purpose of an overriding method is to 
provide an operation in the subclass that is similar to one in the parent class, 
but is customized for objects of the subclass. For example, a parent class, Bird, 
might have a draw method that draws a generic bird. A subclass of Bird named 
Waterfowl could override the draw method inherited from Bird to draw a 
generic waterfowl, perhaps a duck.

Classes can have two kinds of methods and two kinds of variables. The 
most commonly used methods and variables are called instance methods and 
instance variables. Every object of a class has its own set of instance variables, 
which store the object’s state. The only difference between two objects of the 
same class is the state of their instance variables.4 For example, a class for cars 
might have instance variables for color, make, model, and year. Instance meth-
ods operate only on the objects of the class. Class variables belong to the class, 
rather than their objects, so there is only one copy for the class. For example, 
if we wanted to count the number of instances of a class, the counter could not 
be an instance variable—it would need to be a class variable. Class methods 
can perform operations on the class, and possibly also on the objects of the 
class. They can be called by prefixing their names with either the class name or 
a variable that references one of their instances. If a class defines a class method, 
that method can be called even if there are no instances of the class. A class 
method could be used to create an instance of the class.

If a new class is a subclass of a single parent class, then the derivation pro-
cess is called single inheritance. If a class has more than one parent class, the 
process is called multiple inheritance. When a number of classes are related 
through single inheritance, their relationships to each other can be shown in a 
derivation tree. The class relationships in a multiple inheritance can be shown 
in a derivation graph. This is shown in Figure 12.5 in Section 12.4.2.2.

One disadvantage of inheritance as a means of increasing the possibility of 
reuse is that it creates dependencies among the classes in an inheritance hierar-
chy. This result works against one of the advantages of abstract data types, which 
is that they are independent of each other. Of course, not all abstract data types 
must be completely independent. But in general, the independence of abstract 
data types is one of their strongest positive characteristics. However, it may be 
difficult, if not impossible, to increase the reusability of abstract data types with-
out creating dependencies among some of them. Furthermore, in many cases, the 
dependencies naturally mirror dependencies in the underlying problem space.

In Chapter 11 the access controls for variables and methods, together often 
called members, in a class are discussed. Private members are visible inside the 
class, while public members also are visible to clients of the class. Inheritance 
brings a new category of possible visibility, subclasses. Private members of 

4.  This is not true in Ruby, which allows different objects of the same class to differ in other 

ways.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   487

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
488 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

a base class are not visible to subclasses, but public members are. The third 
level of accessibility, protected, allows members of a base class to be visible to 
subclasses, but not clients.

12.2.3  Dynamic Binding

The third essential characteristic (after abstract data types and inheritance) of 
object-oriented programming languages is a kind of polymorphism5 provided 
by the dynamic binding of messages to method definitions. This is sometimes 
called dynamic dispatch. Consider the following situation: There is a base 
class, A, that defines a method draw that draws some figure associated with the 
base class. A second class, B, is defined as a subclass of A. Objects of this new 
class also need a draw method that is like that provided by A but a bit different 
because the subclass objects are slightly different. So, the subclass overrides 
the inherited draw method. If a client of A and B has a variable that is a ref-
erence to class A’s objects, that reference also could point at class B’s objects, 
making it a polymorphic reference. If the method draw, which is defined in 
both classes, is called through the polymorphic reference, the run-time system 
must determine, during execution, which method should be called, A’s or B’s 
(by determining which type object is currently referenced by the reference).6 
 Figure 12.2 shows this situation.

Polymorphism is a natural part of any object-oriented language that is 
statically typed. In a sense, polymorphism makes a statically typed language a 
little bit dynamically typed, where the little bit is in some bindings of method 
calls to methods. The type of a polymorphic variable is indeed dynamic.

One purpose of dynamic binding is to allow software systems to be more 
easily extended during both development and maintenance. Suppose we have 
a catalog of used cars that is implemented as a Car class and a subclass for each 

Figure 12.2

Dynamic binding

public class A {
  . . .
  draw( ) {. . .}
  . . .
}  

public class B extends A {
  . . .
  draw( ) {. . .}
  . . .
}

client

. . .
A myA = new A( );
myA.draw( );
. . .

5.  Polymorphism is defined in Chapter 9.
6.  Dynamic binding of method calls to methods is sometimes called dynamic polymorphism.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   488

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
12.3  Design Issues for Object-Oriented Languages 

  489

car in the catalog. The subclasses contain an image of the car and specific infor-
mation about the car. Users can browse the cars with a program that displays 
the images and information about each car as the user browses to it. The display 
of each car (and its information) includes a button that the user can click if he or 
she is interested in that particular car. After the user gets through the catalog, 
the system will print the images and information about the cars of interest to 
the user. One way to implement this system is to place a reference to each car 
(subclass of Car) of interest in a list that can store references to the base class, 
Car. When the user is ready, information about all of the cars of interest could 
be printed for the user to study and compare the cars in the list. The catalog 
of cars will of course change frequently. This will necessitate corresponding 
changes in the subclasses of Car. However, changes to the collection of sub-
classes will not require any other changes to the system.

In some cases, the design of an inheritance hierarchy results in one or 
more classes that are so high in the hierarchy that an instantiation of them 
would not make sense. For example, suppose a program defined a Building 
class and a collection of subclasses for specific types of buildings, for instance, 
French_Gothic_Cathedrals. It probably would not make sense to have an 
implemented draw method in Building. But because all of its descendant 
classes  should  have  such  methods,  the  protocol  (but  not  the  body)  of  that 
method is included in Building. Such a method is often called an abstract 
method (pure virtual method in C++). A class that includes at least one abstract 
method is called an abstract class (abstract base class in C++). Such a class usually 
cannot be instantiated, because some of its methods are declared but are not 
defined (they do not have bodies). Any subclass of an abstract class that is to be 
instantiated must provide implementations (definitions) of all of the inherited 
abstract methods.

12.3  Design Issues for Object-Oriented Languages

A number of issues must be considered when designing the programming lan-
guage features to support inheritance and dynamic binding. Those that we 
consider most important are discussed in this section.

12.3.1  The Exclusivity of Objects

A language designer who is totally committed to the object model of com-
putation designs an object system that subsumes all other concepts of type. 
Everything, from a simple scalar integer to a complete software system, is 
an object in this mind-set. The advantage of this choice is the elegance and 
pure uniformity of the language and its use. The primary disadvantage is that 
simple operations must be done through the message-passing process, which 
often makes them slower than similar operations in an imperative model, where 

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   489

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
490 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

single machine instructions may implement such simple operations. In this 
purest model of object-oriented computation, all types are classes. There is no 
distinction between predefined and user-defined classes. In fact, all classes are 
treated the same way and all computation is accomplished through message 
passing.

One alternative to the exclusive use of objects that is common in imperative 
languages to which support for object-oriented programming has been added is 
the following: Retain the complete collection of types from the base imperative 
language and add the object typing model. This approach results in a larger 
language whose type structure can be confusing to new users of the language.
Another  alternative  to  the  exclusive  use  of  objects  is  to  have  an 
 imperative-style type structure for the primitive scalar types, but implement 
all structured types as objects. This choice provides the speed of operations on 
primitive values that is comparable to those expected in the imperative model.

12.3.2  Are Subclasses Subtypes?

If a language allows programs in which a variable of a class can be substituted 
for a variable of one of its ancestor classes in any situation, without causing type 
errors and without changing the behavior of the program, that language sup-
ports the principle of substitution. In such a language, if class B is derived 
from class A, then B has everything A has and the behavior of an object of class 
B, when used in place of an object of class A, is identical to that of an object of 
class A.7 When this is true, B is a subtype of A. Although a subclass that is a 
subtype of its parent class must expose all of the members that are exposed by 
its parent class, the subclass can have members that are not in the parent class 
and still be a subtype.

The subtypes of Ada are examples of predefined subtypes. For example,

subtype Small_Int is Integer range -100..100;

Variables of Small_Int type have all of the operations of Integer variables 
but can store only a subset of the values possible in Integer. Furthermore, 
every Small_Int variable can be used anywhere an Integer variable can be 
used. That is, every Small_Int variable is, in a sense, an Integer variable.

The definition of subtype clearly disallows having public entities in the 
parent class that are not public in the subclass. So, the derivation process for 
subtypes must require that public entities of the parent class are inherited as 
public entities in the subclass.

Not all subclasses are subtypes and not all subtypes are subclasses. For 
example, a subclass cannot be a subtype if it changes the behavior of one of its 
overriding methods. Also, a class that is not a subclass of another class can be a 
subtype of that class by defining the same members, in terms of both types and 

7.  There is a fundamental theoretical problem with this last requirement: In general, it is not 

possible to determine if the behaviors of two programs are identical.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   490

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
 
12.3  Design Issues for Object-Oriented Languages 

  491

behavior. A subtype inherits interfaces and behavior, while a subclass inherits 
implementation, primarily to promote code reuse.

Most static-typed languages that support object-oriented programming 
are designed so that subclasses are subtypes, unless the programmer specifically 
designs a subclass that has behavior that differs from that of its parent class.

One obvious question is: Is the issue of whether subclasses are subtypes a 
theoretical or practical one? It is probably unusual to define a subclass whose 
overriding methods preserve the type protocols of their corresponding overrid-
den methods but not their effects. So it is not a frequent practical issue. How-
ever, requiring all subclasses to be subtypes, if there were a reasonably simple 
way to enforce that, would place inheritance on a sounder theoretical base.

12.3.3  Single and Multiple Inheritance

Another simple design issue for object-oriented languages is: Does the lan-
guage allow multiple inheritance (in addition to single inheritance)? Maybe 
it’s not so simple. The purpose of multiple inheritance is to allow a new class 
to inherit from two or more classes.

Because multiple inheritance is sometimes highly useful, why would a lan-
guage designer not include it? The reasons lie in two categories: complexity 
and efficiency. The additional complexity is illustrated by several problems. 
First, note that if a class has two unrelated parent classes and neither defines 
a name that is defined in the other, there is no problem. However, suppose a 
subclass named C inherits from both class A and class B and both A and B define 
an inheritable method named display. If C needs to reference both versions 
of display, how can that be done? This ambiguity problem is further compli-
cated when the two parent classes both define identically named methods and 
one or both of them must be overridden in the subclass.

Another issue arises if both A and B are derived from a common parent, 
Z, and C has both A and B as parent classes. This situation is called diamond 
or shared inheritance. In this case, both A and B should include Z’s inheritable 
variables. Suppose Z includes an inheritable variable named sum. The question 
is whether C should inherit both versions of sum or just one, and if just one, 
which one? There may be programming situations in which just one of the two 
should be inherited, and others in which both should be inherited. A similar 
problem occurs when both A and B inherit a method from Z and both override 
that method. If a client of C, which inherits both overriding methods, calls the 
method, which method is called, or are both supposed to be called. Diamond 
inheritance is shown in Figure 12.3.

Figure 12.3

An example of diamond 
inheritance

A

Z

C

B

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   491

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
492 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

The question of efficiency may be more perceived than real. In C++, for 
example, supporting multiple inheritance requires just one additional array 
access and one extra addition operation for each dynamically bound method 
call,  at  least  with  some  machine  architectures  (Stroustrup,  1994,  p.  270). 
Although this operation is required even if the program does not use multiple 
inheritance, it is a small additional cost.

The use of multiple inheritance can easily lead to complex program orga-
nizations. Many who have attempted to use multiple inheritance have found 
that designing the classes to be used as multiple parents is difficult. And the 
difficulties are not restricted to those created by the initial developer. A class 
might be used by another developer at some later date as one of the parents of 
a new class. Maintenance of systems that use multiple inheritance can be a more 
serious problem, for multiple inheritance leads to more complex dependencies 
among classes. It is not clear to some that the benefits of multiple inheritance 
are worth the added effort to design and maintain a system that uses it.

An  interface  is  somewhat  similar  to  an  abstract  class;  its  methods  are 
declared but not defined. Interfaces cannot be instantiated. They are used as 
an alternative to multiple inheritance.8 Interfaces provide some of the benefits 
of multiple inheritance but have fewer disadvantages. For example, the prob-
lems of diamond inheritance are avoided when interfaces, rather than multiple 
inheritance, are used.

12.3.4  Allocation and Deallocation of Objects

There are two design questions concerning the allocation and deallocation of 
objects. The first of these is the place from which objects are allocated. If they 
behave like the abstract data types, then they can be allocated from anywhere. 
This means they could be allocated from the run-time stack or explicitly created 
on the heap with an operator or function, such as new. If they are all heap dynamic, 
there is the advantage of having a uniform method of creation and access through 
pointer or reference variables. This design simplifies the assignment operation for 
objects, making it in all cases only a pointer or reference value change. It also allows 
references to objects to be implicitly dereferenced, simplifying the access syntax.

If objects are stack dynamic, there is a potential problem with regard to 
subtypes. If class B is a child of class A and B is a subtype of A, then an object of 
B type can be assigned to a variable of A type. For example, if b1 is a variable of 
B type and a1 is a variable of A type, then

a1 = b1;

is a legal statement. If a1 and b1 are references to heap-dynamic objects, there 
is no problem—the assignment is a simple pointer assignment. However, if 
a1 and b1 are stack dynamic, then they are value variables and, if assigned the 

8.  Interfaces initially appeared in Java, whose designers recognized the difficulties that are 

raised by the use of multiple inheritance.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   492

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
 
12.3  Design Issues for Object-Oriented Languages 

  493

value of the object, must be copied to the space of the target object. If B adds 
a data field to what it inherited from A, then a1 will not have sufficient space 
on the stack for all of b1. The excess will simply be truncated, which could be 
confusing to programmers who write or use the code. This truncation is called 
object slicing. The following example and Figure 12.4 illustrate the problem.

class A {
  int x;
  . . .
};
class B : A {
  int y;
  . . .
}

The second question here is concerned with those cases where objects 
are allocated from the heap. The question is whether deallocation is implicit, 
explicit, or both. If deallocation is implicit, some implicit method of storage 
reclamation is required. If deallocation can be explicit, that raises the issue of 
whether dangling pointers or references can be created.

12.3.5  Dynamic and Static Binding

As discussed in Section 12.2.3, dynamic binding of messages to methods is an 
essential part of object-oriented programming. The question here is whether 
all bindings of messages to methods are dynamic. The alternative is to allow 
the user to specify whether a specific binding is to be dynamic or static. The 
advantage of this is that static bindings are faster. So, if a binding need not be 
dynamic, why pay the price?

12.3.6  Nested Classes

One of the primary motivations for nesting class definitions is information 
hiding. If a new class is needed by only one class, there is no reason to define it 
so it can be seen by other classes. In this situation, the new class can be nested 

Figure 12.4

An example of object 
slicing

b1

a1

data area

data area

x
y

…

x

…

…

stack

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   493

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
494 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

inside the class that uses it. In some cases, the new class is nested inside a sub-
program, rather than directly in another class.

The class in which the new class is nested is called the nesting class. The 
most obvious design issues associated with class nesting are related to visibility. 
Specifically, one issue is: Which of the members of the nesting class are visible 
in the nested class? The other important issue is the opposite: Which of the 
members of the nested class are visible in the nesting class?

12.3.7 

Initialization of Objects

The initialization issue is whether and how objects are initialized to values 
when they are created. This is more complicated than may be first thought. 
One question is whether objects must be initialized manually or through some 
implicit mechanism. When an object of a subclass is created, is the associated 
initialization of the inherited parent class member implicit or must the pro-
grammer explicitly deal with it?

12.4   Support for Object-Oriented Programming  

in Specific Languages

12.4.1  Smalltalk

Many think of Smalltalk as the definitive object-oriented programming lan-
guage. It was the first language to include complete support for that paradigm. 
Therefore,  it  is  natural  to  begin  a  survey  of  language  support  for  object- 
oriented programming with Smalltalk.

12.4.1.1  General Characteristics

In Smalltalk, the concept of an object is truly universal. Virtually everything, 
from things as simple as the integer constant  2 to a complex file-handling 
system, is an object. As objects, they are treated uniformly. They all have local 
memory, inherent processing ability, the capability to communicate with other 
objects, and the possibility of inheriting methods and instance variables from 
ancestors. Classes cannot be nested in Smalltalk.

All computation is through messages, even a simple arithmetic operation. 
For example, the expression x + 7 is implemented as sending the + message to 
x (to enact the + method), sending 7 as the parameter. This operation returns 
a new numeric object with the result of the addition.

Replies  to  messages  have  the  form  of  objects  and  are  used  to  return 
requested or computed information or only to confirm that the requested ser-
vice has been completed.

All  Smalltalk  objects  are  allocated  from  the  heap  and  are  referenced 
through reference variables, which are implicitly dereferenced. There is no 

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   494

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
12.4  Support for Object-Oriented Programming in Specific Languages  

  495

explicit deallocation statement or operation. So, all deallocation is implicit, 
using a garbage collection process for storage reclamation.

In Smalltalk, constructors must be explicitly called when an object is cre-
ated. A class can have multiple constructors, but each must have a unique name.

Smalltalk classes cannot be nested in other classes.
Unlike a hybrid language such as C++, Smalltalk was designed for just one 
software development paradigm—object oriented. Furthermore, it adopts none 
of the appearance of the imperative languages. Its purity of purpose is ref lected 
in its simple elegance and uniformity of design.

There is an example Smalltalk program in Chapter 2.

12.4.1.2  Inheritance

A Smalltalk subclass inherits all of the members of its superclass. The subclass 
can also have its own instance variables, which must have names that are distinct 
from the variable names in its ancestor classes. Finally, the subclass can define 
new methods and redefine methods that already exist in an ancestor class. When 
a subclass has a method whose name and protocol are the same as an ancestor 
class, the subclass method hides that of the ancestor class. Access to such a hidden 
method is provided by prefixing the message with the pseudovariable super. The 
prefix causes the method search to begin in the superclass rather than locally.

Because members in a parent class cannot be hidden from subclasses, sub-

classes can be and usually are subtypes.

Smalltalk does not support multiple inheritance.

12.4.1.3  Dynamic Binding

The dynamic binding of messages to methods in Smalltalk operates as follows: 
A message to an object causes a search of the class to which the object belongs 
for a corresponding method. If the search fails, it is continued in the super-
class of that class, and so forth, up to the system class, Object, which has no 
superclass. Object is the root of the class derivation tree on which every class 
is a node. If no method is found anywhere in that chain, an error occurs. It 
is important to remember that this method search is dynamic—it takes place 
when the message is sent. Smalltalk does not, under any circumstances, bind 
messages to methods statically.

The only type checking in Smalltalk is dynamic, and the only type error 
occurs when a message is sent to an object that has no matching method, either 
locally or through inheritance. This is a different concept of type checking than 
that of most other languages. Smalltalk type checking has the simple goal of 
ensuring that a message matches some method.

Smalltalk variables are not typed; any name can be bound to any object. As 
a direct result, Smalltalk supports dynamic polymorphism. All Smalltalk code is 
generic in the sense that the types of the variables are irrelevant, as long as they 
are consistent. The meaning of an operation (method or operator) on a variable 
is determined by the class of the object to which the variable is currently bound.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   495

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
496 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

The point of this discussion is that as long as the objects referenced in an 
expression have methods for the messages of the expression, the types of the 
objects are irrelevant. This means that no code is tied to a particular type.

12.4.1.4  Evaluation of Smalltalk

Smalltalk is a small language, although the Smalltalk system is large. The syn-
tax of the language is simple and highly regular. It is a good example of the 
power that can be provided by a small language if that language is built around 
a simple but powerful concept. In the case of Smalltalk, that concept is that all 
programming can be done employing only a class hierarchy built using inher-
itance, objects, and message passing.

In comparison with conventional compiled imperative-language programs, 
equivalent Smalltalk programs are significantly slower. Although it is theo-
retically interesting that array indexing and loops can be provided within the 
message-passing model, efficiency is an important factor in the evaluation of 
programming languages. Therefore, efficiency will clearly be an issue in most 
discussions of the practical applicability of Smalltalk.

Smalltalk’s dynamic binding allows type errors to go undetected until run 
time. A program can be written that includes messages to nonexistent methods 
and it will not be detected until the messages are sent, which causes a great deal 
more error repair later in the development than would occur in a static-typed 
language. However, in practice type errors are not a serious problem with 
Smalltalk programs.

Overall, the design of Smalltalk consistently came down on the side of 
language elegance and strict adherence to the principles of object-oriented 
programming support, often without regard for practical matters, in particular 
execution efficiency. This is most obvious in the exclusive use of objects and 
the typeless variables.

The Smalltalk user interface has had an important impact on computing: 
The integrated use of windows, mouse-pointing devices, and pop-up and pull-
down menus, all of which first appeared in Smalltalk, dominate contemporary 
software systems.

Perhaps the greatest impact of Smalltalk is the advancement of object- oriented 

programming, now the most widely used design and coding methodology.

12.4.2  C++

Chapter 2 describes how C++ evolved from C and SIMULA 67, with the design 
goal of support for object-oriented programming while retaining nearly com-
plete backward compatibility with C. C++ classes, as they are used to support 
abstract data types, are discussed in Chapter 11. C++ support for the other 
essentials of object-oriented programming is explored in this section. The whole 
collection of details of C++ classes, inheritance, and dynamic binding is large and 
complex. This section discusses only the most important among these topics, 
specifically, those directly related to the design issues described in Section 12.3.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   496

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
12.4  Support for Object-Oriented Programming in Specific Languages  

  497

C++ was the first widely used object-oriented programming language and 
is still among the most popular. So, naturally, it is the one with which other 
languages are often compared. For both of these reasons, our coverage of C++ 
here is more detailed than that of the other example languages discussed in 
this chapter.

12.4.2.1  General Characteristics

To maintain backward compatibility with C, C++ retains the type system of C 
and adds classes to it. Therefore, C++ has both traditional imperative- language 
types and the class structure of an object-oriented language. It supports meth-
ods, as well as functions that are not related to specific classes. This makes 
it a hybrid language, supporting both procedural programming and object- 
oriented programming.

The objects of C++ can be static, stack dynamic, or heap dynamic. Explicit 
deallocation using the delete operator is required for heap-dynamic objects, 
because C++ does not include implicit storage reclamation.

Many class definitions include a destructor method, which is implicitly 
called when an object of the class ceases to exist. The destructor is used to 
deallocate heap-allocated memory that is referenced by data members. It may 
also be used to record part or all of the state of the object just before it dies, 
usually for debugging purposes.

12.4.2.2  Inheritance

A C++ class can be derived from an existing class, which is then its parent, or 
base, class. Unlike Smalltalk and most other languages that support object- 
oriented programming, a C++ class can also be stand-alone, without a super-
class. In the definition of a derived class, the name of the derived class has the 
name of the base class attached with a colon (:), as in the following syntactic  
form:

class derived_class_name : base_class_name { ... }

The data defined in a class definition are called data members of that class, 
and the functions defined in a class definition are called member functions of that 
class (member functions in other languages are usually called methods). Some 
or all of the members of the base class may be inherited by the derived class, 
which can also add new members and modify inherited member functions.

All C++ objects must be initialized before they are used. Therefore, all C++ 
classes include at least one constructor method that initializes the data members 
of the new object. Constructor methods are implicitly called when an object 
is created. If any of the data members are pointers to heap-allocated data, the 
constructor allocates that storage.

If a class is derived from another class, the inherited data members must 
be initialized when the derived class object is created. To do this, the base class 
constructor is implicitly called. When initialization data must be furnished to 

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   497

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
in ter view

On Paradigms and Better Programming

B J A R N E   S T R O U S T R U P

Bjarne Stroustrup is the designer and original implementer of C++ and the 
author of A Tour of C++, Programming: Principles and Practice Using C++, 
The C++ Programming Language, The Design and Evolution of C++, and many 
other  publications. His research interests include distributed systems, design, 
 programming techniques, software development tools, and programming languages. 
He is actively involved in the ANSI/ISO standardization of C++. Dr. Stroustrup is a 
managing director in the technology division of Morgan Stanley in New York City, a 
Visiting Professor in Computer Science at Columbia University, and a  Distinguished 
Research Professor in Computer Science at Texas A&M University. He is a member 
of the National Academy of Engineering, an ACM Fellow, and an IEEE Fellow. In 
1993, Stroustrup received the ACM Grace Murray Hopper Award “for his early 
work laying the foundations for the C++ programming language. Based on the 
 foundations and Dr. Stroustrup’s continuing efforts, C++ has become one of the 
most influential programming languages in the history of computing.”
(year of interview: 2002)

PROGRAMMING PARADIGMS

Your thoughts on the object-oriented paradigm: Its 
pluses and minuses. Let me first say what I mean by 
OOP—too many people think that “object-oriented” 
is simply a synonym for “good.” If so, there would be 
no need for other paradigms. The key to OO is the use 
of class hierarchies providing polymorphic behavior 
through some rough equivalent of virtual functions. 
For proper OO, it is important to avoid directly access-
ing the data in such a hierarchy and to use only a 
well-designed functional interface.

In addition to its well-documented strengths, 
object-oriented programming also has obvious weak-
nesses. In particular, not every concept naturally fits 
into a class hierarchy, and the mechanisms supporting 
object-oriented programming can impose significant 
overheads compared to alternatives. For many simple 
abstractions, classes that do not rely on hierarchies 
and run-time binding provide a simpler and more 
efficient alternative. Furthermore, where no run-time 
resolution is needed, generic programming relying on 
(compile-time) parametric polymorphism is a better 
behaved and more efficient approach.

So, C++: Is it OO or other? C++ supports 

several paradigms—including OOP, generic 
 programming, and procedural programming—and 
combinations of these paradigms define multiparadigm 
programming as supporting more than one program-
ming style  (“paradigm”) and combinations of those 
styles.

Do you have a mini-example of multiparadigm 
programming? Consider this variant of the classic 
“collection of shapes” examples (originating from 
the early days of the first language to support object- 
oriented programming: Simula 67):

void draw_all(const vector<Shape*>& vs)
{
   for (int i = 0; i<vs.size(); ++i)
       vs[i]->draw();

}

Here, I use the generic container vector together 

with the polymorphic type Shape. The vector 
provides static type safety and optimal run-time per-
formance. The Shape provides the ability to handle 

498

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   498

1/5/18   10:54 PM

a Shape (i.e., any object of a class derived from 
Shape) without recompilation.

We can easily generalize this to any container that 

meets the C++ standard library requirements:

template<class C>
       void draw_all(const C& c)
{
    typedef typename C::
       const_iterator CI;
    for (CI p = c.begin();
       p!=c.end(); ++p)
       (*p)->draw();

}

Using iterators allows us to apply this draw_all () 
to containers that do not support subscripts, such as a 
standard library list:

vector<Shape*> vs;
list<Shape*> ls;
// . . .
draw_all(vs);

draw_all(ls);

We can even generalize this further to handle any 

sequence of elements defined by a pair of iterators:

template<class Iterator> void  
draw_all(Iterator b, Iterator e)
{
    for_each(b,e,mem_fun(&Shape::draw));

}

To simplify the implementation, I used the standard 
library algorithm for_each.

We might call this last version of draw_all() 

for a standard library list and an array:

list<Shape*> ls;
Shape* as[100];
// . . .
draw_all(ls.begin(),ls.end());

draw_all(as,as+100);

SELECTING THE “RIGHT” LANGUAGE  
FOR THE JOB

How useful is it to have this background in 
numerous paradigms? Or would it be better to 
invest time in becoming even more familiar with 
OO languages rather than learning these other 
paradigms?  It is essential for anyone who wants to 
be considered a professional in the areas of software 
to know several languages and several programming 
paradigms. Currently, C++ is the best language for 
multiparadigm programming and a good language 
for learning various forms of programming. However, 
it’s not a good idea to know just C++, let alone to 
know just a single-paradigm language. That would 
be a bit like being colorblind or monoglot: You would 
hardly know what you were missing. Much of the 
inspiration to good programming comes from hav-
ing learned and appreciated several programming 
styles and seen how they can be used in different 
languages.

Furthermore, I consider programming of any 
nontrivial program a job for professionals with a 
solid and broad education, rather than for people 
with a hurried and narrow “training.”

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   499

1/5/18   10:54 PM

499

500 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

the base class constructor, it is given in the call to the derived object  constructor. 
In general, this is done with the following construct:

subclass(subclass parameters): base_class(superclass parameters) {

...

}

If no constructor is included by the developer in a class definition, the 
compiler includes a trivial constructor. This default constructor calls the con-
structor of the base class, if there is a base class.

Class members can be private, protected, or public. Private members are 
accessible only by member functions and friends of the class. Standalone func-
tions, member functions, and classes can be declared to be friends of a class and 
thereby be given access to its private members. Public members are visible every-
where. Protected members are like private members, except in derived classes, 
whose access is described next. Derived classes can modify accessibility for their 
inherited members. The complete syntactic form of a derived class is as follows:

class derived_class_name : derivation_mode base_class_name
  {data member and member function declarations};

The derivation_mode can be either public or private.9 (Do not confuse 
public and private derivation with public and private members.) The public and 
protected members of a base class are also public and protected, respectively, 
in a public-derived class. In a private-derived class, both the public and pro-
tected  members  of  the  base  class  are  private.  So,  in  a  class  hierarchy,  a 
 private-derived class cuts off access to all members of all ancestor classes to all 
successor classes. Private members of a base class are inherited by a derived 
class, but they are not visible to the members of that derived class and are 
therefore of no use there. Private derivations provide the possibility that a 
subclass can have members with different access than the same members in the 
parent class. Consider the following example:

class base_class {
  private:
    int a;
    float  x;
  protected:
    int b;
    float y;
  public:
    int c;
    float z;
};

 class subclass_1 : public base_class {. . .};
 class subclass_2 : private base_class {. . .};

9.  It can also be protected, but that option is not discussed here.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   500

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
 
12.4  Support for Object-Oriented Programming in Specific Languages  

  501

In subclass_1, b and y are protected, and c and z are public. In subclass_2, 
b, y, c, and z are private. No derived class of subclass_2 can have members 
with access to any member of base_class. The data members a and x in 
base_class are not accessible in either subclass_1 or subclass_2.

Note that private-derived subclasses cannot be subtypes. For example, if 
the base class has a public data member, under private derivation that data 
member would be private in the subclass. Therefore, if an object of the subclass 
were substituted for an object of the base class, accesses to that data member 
would be illegal on the subclass object. However, public-derived subclasses can 
be and usually are subtypes.

Under private class derivation, no member of the parent class is implicitly 
visible to the instances of the derived class. Any member that must be made 
visible must be reexported in the derived class. This reexportation in effect 
exempts a member from being hidden even though the derivation was private. 
For example, consider the following class definition:

class subclass_3 : private base_class {
  base_class :: c;
  . . .
}

Now, instances of subclass_3 can access c. As far as c is concerned, it is as if 
the derivation had been public. The double colon (::) in this class definition 
is a scope resolution operator. It specifies the class where its following entity 
is defined.

The example in the following paragraphs illustrates the purpose and use 

of private derivation.

Consider the following example of C++ inheritance, in which a general 

linked-list class is defined and then used to define two useful subclasses:

class single_linked_list {
  private:
    class node {
      public:
        node *link;
        int contents;
    };
    node *head;
  public:
    single_linked_list() {head = 0};
    void  insert_at_head(int);
    void  insert_at_tail(int);
    int  remove_at_head();
    int  empty();
};

The nested class, node, defines a cell of the linked list to consist of an integer 
variable and a pointer to a node object. The node class is in the private clause, 

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   501

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
502 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

which hides it from all other classes. Its members are public, however, so they 
are visible to the nesting class, single_linked_list. If they were private, 
node would need to declare the nesting class to be a friend to make them visible 
in the nesting class. Note that nested classes have no special access to members 
of the nesting class. Only static data members of the nesting class are visible to 
methods of the nested class.10

The enclosing class, single_linked_list, has just a single data member, 
a pointer to act as the list’s header. It contains a constructor function, which 
sets head to the null pointer value. The four member functions allow nodes to 
be inserted at either end of a list object, nodes to be removed from one end of 
a list, and lists to be tested for empty.

The following definitions provide stack and queue classes, both based on 

the single_linked_list class:

class stack : public single_linked_list {
  public:
    stack() {}
    void push(int value) {
      insert_at_head(value);
    }
    int pop() {
      return remove_at_head();
    }
};
class queue : public single_linked_list {
  public:
    queue() {}
    void enqueue(int value) {
      insert_at_tail(value);
    }
    int dequeue() {
      remove_at_head();
    }
};

Note that objects of both the stack and queue subclasses can access the empty 
function defined in the base class, single_linked_list (because it is a pub-
lic derivation). Both subclasses define constructor functions that do nothing. 
When an object of a subclass is created, the proper constructor in the subclass 
is implicitly called. Then, any applicable constructor in the base class is called. 
So, in our example, when an object of type stack is created, the constructor in 
single_linked_list is called, which does the necessary initialization. Then 
the stack constructor is called, which does nothing.

The classes stack and queue both suffer from the same serious problem: 
Clients  of  both  can  access  all  of  the  public  members  of  the  parent  class, 

10.  A class can also be defined in a method of a nesting class. The scope rules of such classes 

are the same as those for classes nested directly in other classes, even for the local variables 
declared in the method in which they are defined.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   502

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
 
12.4  Support for Object-Oriented Programming in Specific Languages  

  503

single_linked_list. A client of a stack object could call insert_at_tail, 
thereby destroying the integrity of its stack. Likewise, a client of a queue object 
could call insert_at_head. These unwanted accesses are allowed because 
both stack and queue are subtypes of single_linked_list. Public deriva-
tion is used when one wants the subclass to inherit the entire interface of the 
base class. The alternative is to use a derivation in which the subclass inherits 
only the implementation of the base class. Our two example derived classes can 
be written to make them not subtypes of their parent class by using private, 
rather than public, derivation.11 Then, both will also need to reexport empty, 
because it will become hidden to their instances. This situation illustrates the 
motivation for the private-derivation option. The new definitions of the stack 
and queue types, named stack_2 and queue_2, are shown in the following:

class stack_2 : private single_linked_list {
  public:
    stack_2() {}
    void push(int value) {
      single_linked_list :: insert_at_head(value);
    }
    int pop() {
      return single_linked_list :: remove_at_head();
    }
    single_linked_list:: empty();
};
class queue_2 : private single_linked_list {
  public:
    queue_2() {}
    void enqueue(int value) {
      single_linked_list :: insert_at_tail(value);
    }
    int dequeue() {
      single_linked_list :: remove_at_head();
    }
    single_linked_list:: empty();
};

These two classes use reexportation to allow access to base class methods for 
clients. This was not necessary when public derivation was used.

The two versions of stack and queue illustrate the difference between sub-
types and derived types that are not subtypes. The linked list is a generalization 
of both stacks and queues, because both can be implemented as linked lists. So, 
it is natural to inherit from a linked-list class to define stack and queue classes. 
However, neither is a subtype of the linked-list class, because both make the pub-
lic members of the parent class private, which makes them inaccessible to clients.
One of the reasons friends are necessary is that sometimes a subprogram 
must  be  written  that  can  access  the  members  of  two  different  classes.  For 

11.  They would not be subtypes because the public members of the parent class can be seen in a 

client, but not in a client of the subclass, where those members are private.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   503

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
504 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

example, suppose a program uses a class for vectors and one for matrices, and 
a subprogram is needed to multiply a matrix object by a vector object. In C++, 
the multiply function can be made a friend of both classes.

As previously stated, C++ provides multiple inheritance. As an example, 
suppose we wanted a class for drawing that needed the behavior of a class 
written for drawing figures and the methods of the new class needed to run in 
a separate thread. We might define the following:

class Thread { . . . };
class Drawing { . . . };
class DrawThread : public Thread, public Drawing { . . . };

Class DrawThread inherits all of the members of both Thread and  Drawing. 
If both Thread and Drawing happen to include members with the same name, 
they can be unambiguously referenced in objects of class  DrawThread by using 
the scope resolution operator (::). This example of multiple inheritance is 
shown in Figure 12.5.

Some issues with the C++ implementation of multiple inheritance are dis-

cussed in Section 12.5.

Overriding methods12 in C++ must have exactly the same parameter profile 
as the overridden method. If there is any difference in the parameter profiles, 
the method in the subclass is considered a new method that is unrelated to the 
method with the same name in the ancestor class. The return type of the over-
riding method either must be the same as that of the overridden method or 
must be a publicly derived type of the return type of the overridden method.

12.4.2.3  Dynamic Binding

All of the member functions we have defined thus far are statically bound; 
that is, a call to one of them is statically bound to a function definition. A 
C++ object could be manipulated through a value variable, rather than a 

Figure 12.5

Multiple inheritance

Thread

Drawing

DrawThread

12.  Recall that an overriding method is one that is defined in the derived class to replace a 
 virtual method inherited from an ancestor class. Calls to an overriding method must be 
dynamically bound.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   504

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
 
12.4  Support for Object-Oriented Programming in Specific Languages  

  505

pointer or a reference. (Such an object would be static or stack dynamic.) 
However,  in  that  case,  the  object’s  type  is  known  and  static,  so  dynamic 
binding is not needed. On the other hand, a pointer variable that has the 
type of a base class can be used to point to any heap-dynamic object of any 
class publicly derived from that base class, making it a polymorphic variable. 
Publicly derived subclasses are subtypes if none of the members of the base 
class are private. Privately derived subclasses are never subtypes. A pointer 
to a base class cannot be used to reference a method in a subclass that is not 
a subtype.

C++ does not allow value variables (as opposed to pointers or references) 
to be polymorphic. When a polymorphic variable is used to call a member 
function overridden in one of the derived classes, the call must be dynamically 
bound to the correct member function definition.

Consider the situation of having a base class named Shape, along with a 
collection of derived classes for different kinds of shapes, such as circles, rect-
angles, and so forth. If these shapes need to be displayed, then the displaying 
member function, draw, must be unique for each descendant, or kind of shape. 
These versions of draw must be defined to be virtual. When a call to draw is 
made with a pointer to the base class of the derived classes, that call must be 
dynamically bound to the member function of the correct derived class. The 
following example has the skeletal definitions for the example situation just 
described:

class Shape {
  public:
    virtual void  draw() = 0;
  . . .
};
class Circle : public Shape {
  public:
    void draw() { . . . }
  . . .
};
class Rectangle : public Shape {
  public:
    void draw() { . . . }
  . . .
};

Given these definitions, the following code has examples of both statically and 
dynamically bound calls:

Circle* circ = new Circle; 
Rectangle* rect = new Rectangle;
Shape* ptr_shape;
ptr_shape = circ;          // Now ptr_shape points to a
                           //  Circle object

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   505

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
506 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

ptr_shape->draw();       // Dynamically bound to the draw
                         //  in the Circle class
rect->draw();            // Statically bound to the draw
                         //  in the Rectangle class

This situation is shown in Figure 12.6.

Notice that the draw function in the definition of the base class shape is 
set to 0. This peculiar syntax is used to indicate that this member function is 
a pure virtual function, meaning that it has no body and it cannot be called. 
It must be redefined in derived classes if they call the function. The purpose 
of a pure virtual function is to provide the interface of a function without 
giving any of its implementation. Pure virtual functions are usually defined 
when an actual member function in the base class would not be useful. Recall 
that in Section 12.2.3, a base class Building was discussed, and each subclass 
described some particular kind of building. Each subclass had a draw method 
but none of these would be useful in the base class. So, draw would be a pure 
virtual function in the Building class.

Figure 12.6

Dynamic binding

Class Hierarchy

Shape

virtual void draw ( ) = 0

Circle

Rectangle

void draw ( ) { ... }

void draw ( ) { ... }

Types

Pointers

Bindings

ptr_shape

Shape*

Objects

Square

void draw ( ) { ... }

rect

Rectangle

Rectangle*

void draw ( ) { ... }

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   506

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
12.4  Support for Object-Oriented Programming in Specific Languages  

  507

Any class that includes a pure virtual function is an abstract class. In C++, 
an abstract class is not marked with a reserved word. An abstract class can 
include completely defined methods. Because of the presence of one or more 
virtual functions, it is illegal to instantiate an abstract class. In a strict sense, an 
abstract class is one that is used only to represent the characteristics of a type. 
C++ provides abstract classes to model these truly abstract classes. If a subclass 
of an abstract class does not redefine a pure virtual function of its parent class, 
that function remains as a pure virtual function in the subclass and the subclass 
is also an abstract class.

Abstract classes and inheritance together support a powerful technique for 
software development. They allow types to be hierarchically defined so that 
related types can be subclasses of truly abstract types that define their common 
abstract characteristics.

Dynamic binding allows the code that uses members like draw to be writ-
ten before all or even any of the versions of draw are written. New derived 
classes could be added years later, without requiring any change to the code 
that uses such dynamically bound members. This is a highly useful feature of 
object-oriented languages.

Reference assignments for stack-dynamic objects are different from pointer 
assignments for heap-dynamic objects. For example, consider the following 
code, which uses the same class hierarchy as the last example:

Circle circ;     // Allocate a Circle object on the stack
Rectangle rect;  // Allocate a Rectangle object on
                 //  the stack
rect = circ;     // Copies the data member values from
                 //  the Circle object
rect.draw();     // Calls the draw from the Rectangle
                 //  object

In the assignment rect = circ, the member data from the object referenced 
by circ would be assigned to the data members of the object referenced by 
rect, but rect would still reference the Rectangle object. Therefore, the call 
to draw through the object referenced by rect would be that of the  Rectangle 
class. If rect and circ were pointers to heap-dynamic objects, the same assign-
ment would be a pointer assignment, which would make rect point to the 
Circle object, and a call to draw through rect would be bound dynamically 
to the draw in the Circle object.

12.4.2.4  Evaluation

It is natural to compare the object-oriented features of C++ with those of 
Smalltalk. The inheritance of C++ is more intricate than that of Smalltalk 
in terms of access control. By using both the access controls within the class 
definition and the derivation access controls, and also the possibility of friend 

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   507

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
508 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

functions and friend classes, the C++ programmer has highly detailed control 
over access to class members. Although C++ provides multiple inheritance 
and Smalltalk does not, there are many who feel that is not an advantage for 
C++. The downsides of multiple inheritance weigh heavily against its value. In 
fact, C++ is the only language discussed in this chapter that supports multiple 
inheritance. On the other hand, languages that provide alternatives to multiple 
inheritance, such as Java and C#, clearly have an advantage over Smalltalk in 
that area.

In C++, the programmer can specify whether static binding or dynamic 
binding is to be used. Because static binding is faster, this is an advantage for 
those situations where dynamic binding is not necessary. Furthermore, even 
the dynamic binding in C++ is fast when compared with that of Smalltalk. 
Binding a virtual member function call in C++ to a function definition has a 
fixed cost, regardless of how distant in the inheritance hierarchy the definition 
appears. Calls to virtual functions require only five more memory references 
than statically bound calls (Stroustrup, 1988). In Smalltalk, however, messages 
are always dynamically bound to methods, and the farther away in the inheri-
tance hierarchy the correct method is, the longer it takes. The disadvantage of 
allowing the user to decide which bindings are static and which are dynamic 
is that the original design must include these decisions, which may have to be 
changed later.

The static type checking of C++ is an advantage over Smalltalk, in which all 
type checking is dynamic. A Smalltalk program can be written with messages to 
nonexistent methods, which are not discovered until the program is executed. 
A C++ compiler finds such errors. Compiler-detected errors are less expensive 
to repair than those found in testing.

Smalltalk is essentially typeless, meaning that all code is effectively generic. 
This provides a great deal of f lexibility, but static type checking is sacrificed. 
C++  provides  generic  classes  through  its  template  facility  (as  described  in  
Chapter 11), which retains the benefits of static type checking.

The primary advantage of Smalltalk lies in the elegance and simplicity 
of the language, which results from the single philosophy of its design. It is 
purely and completely devoted to the object-oriented paradigm, devoid of 
compromises necessitated by the whims of an entrenched user base. C++, 
on the other hand, is a large and complex language with no single philoso-
phy as its foundation, except to support object-oriented programming and 
include the C user base. One of its most significant goals was to preserve 
the  efficiency  and  f lavor  of  C  while  providing  the  advantages  of  object- 
oriented programming. Some people feel that the features of this language 
do not always fit well together and that at least some of the complexity is 
unnecessary.

According to Chambers and Ungar (1991), Smalltalk ran a particular set 
of small C-style benchmarks at only 10 percent of the speed of optimized C. 
C++ programs require only slightly more time than equivalent C programs 
(Stroustrup, 1988). Given the great efficiency gap between Smalltalk and C++, 

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   508

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
12.4  Support for Object-Oriented Programming in Specific Languages  

  509

it is little wonder that the commercial use of C++ is far more widespread than 
that of Smalltalk. There are other factors in this difference, but efficiency is 
clearly a strong argument in favor of C++. Of course, all of the compiled lan-
guages that support object-oriented programming run approximately 10 times 
faster than Smalltalk.

12.4.3  Java

Because Java’s design of classes, inheritance, and methods is similar to that of 
C++, in this section we focus only on those areas in which Java differs from C++.

12.4.3.1  General Characteristics

As with C++, Java supports both objects and nonobject data. However, in Java, 
only values of the primitive scalar types (Boolean, character, and the numeric 
types) are not objects. Java’s enumerations and arrays are objects. The reason 
Java has nonobjects is efficiency.

In Java 5.0+, primitive values are implicitly coerced when they are put in 
object context. This coercion converts the primitive value to an object of the 
wrapper class of the primitive value’s type. For example, putting an int value 
or variable into object context causes the creation of an Integer object with 
the value of the int primitive. This coercion is called boxing.

Whereas C++ classes can be defined to have no parent, that is not pos-
sible in Java. All Java classes must be subclasses of the root class, Object, or 
some class that is a descendant of Object. One advantage of this is that some 
commonly needed methods, such as toString and equals, can be defined in 
Object and inherited and used by all other classes.

All Java objects are explicit heap dynamic. Most are allocated with the new 
operator, but there is no explicit deallocation operator. Garbage collection is 
used for storage reclamation. Like many other language features, although 
garbage collection avoids some serious problems, such as dangling pointers, 
it can cause other problems. One such difficulty arises because the garbage 
collector deallocates, or reclaims the storage occupied by an object, but it does 
no more. For example, if an object has access to some resource other than heap 
memory, such as a file or a lock on a shared resource, the garbage collector does 
not reclaim these. For these situations, Java allows the inclusion of a special 
method, finalize, which is related to a C++ destructor function.

A finalize method is implicitly called when the garbage collector is about 
to reclaim the storage occupied by the object. The problem with finalize is 
that the time it (and the garbage collector) will run cannot be forced or even 
predicted. The alternative to using finalize to reclaim resources held by an 
object about to be garbage collected is to include a method that does the rec-
lamation. The only problem with this is that all clients of the objects must be 
aware of this method and remember to call it.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   509

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
510 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

12.4.3.2  Inheritance

In Java, a method can be defined to be final, which means that it cannot be 
overridden in any descendant class. When the final reserved word is specified 
on a class definition, it means the class cannot be subclassed. All of the methods 
in a final class are implicitly final, which means that the bindings of method 
calls to the methods of the class are statically bound.

The advantage of defining a class to be final is that no changes to the 
class are allowed. For example, String is a final class and because of that any 
method that receives a String reference in a parameter can depend on the 
stability of the meaning of String’s methods. The disadvantage is that defining 
a class to be final disallows reuses that require even minor modifications.

Java includes the annotation @Override, which informs the compiler to 
check to determine whether the following method overrides a method in an 
ancestor class. If it does not, the compiler issues an error message.

Like C++, Java requires that parent class constructor be called before the 
subclass constructor is called. If parameters are to be passed to the parent 
class constructor, that constructor must be explicitly called, as in the following 
example:

super(100, true);

If there is no explicit call to the parent class constructor, the compiler inserts a 
call to the zero-parameter constructor in the parent class.

Java does not support the private derivations of C++. One can surmise that 
the Java designers believed that subclasses should be subtypes, which they are 
not when private derivations are supported. Thus, they did not include them. 
So, Java’s subclasses can be subtypes.

Early versions of Java included a collection, Vector, which included a long 
list of methods for manipulating data in a collection construct. These versions 
of Java also included a subclass of Vector, Stack, which added methods for 
push and pop operations. Unfortunately, because Java does not have private 
derivation, all of the methods of Vector were also visible in the Stack class, 
which made Stack objects liable to a variety of operations that could invalidate 
those objects.

Java directly supports only single inheritance. However, it includes a kind 
of abstract class, called an interface, which provides partial support for multiple 
inheritance. An interface definition is similar to a class definition, except that 
it can contain only named constants and method declarations (not definitions). 
It cannot contain constructors, nonabstract methods, or variable declarations. 
So, an interface is no more than what its name indicates—it defines only the 
specification of a class. (Recall that a C++ abstract class can have instance vari-
ables and all but one of the methods can be completely defined.) A class does 
not inherit an interface; it implements it. In fact, a class can implement any 
number of interfaces. To implement an interface, the class must implement all 
of the methods whose specifications (but not bodies) appear in the interface 
definition.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   510

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
12.4  Support for Object-Oriented Programming in Specific Languages  

  511

An interface can be used to simulate multiple inheritance. A class can be 
derived from a class and implement an interface, with the interface taking the 
place of a second parent class. This is sometimes called mixin inheritance, 
because the constants and methods of the interface are mixed in with the meth-
ods and data inherited from the superclass, as well as any new data and/or 
methods defined in the subclass.

One more interesting capability of interfaces is that they provide another 
kind of polymorphism. This is because interfaces can be treated as types. For 
example, a method can specify a formal parameter that is an interface. Such a 
formal parameter can accept an actual parameter of any class that implements 
the interface, making the method polymorphic.

A nonparameter variable also can be declared to be of the type of an inter-
face. Such a variable can reference any object of any class that implements the 
interface.

One of the problems with multiple inheritance occurs when a class is derived 
from two parent classes and both define a public method with the same name 
and protocol. This problem is avoided with interfaces. Although a class that 
implements an interface must provide definitions for all of the methods specified 
in the interface, if the class and the interface both include methods with the 
same name and protocol, the class need not reimplement that method. So, the 
method name conf licts that can occur with multiple inheritance cannot occur 
with single inheritance and interfaces. Furthermore, variable name conf licts are 
completely avoided because interfaces cannot define variables.

An interface is not a replacement for multiple inheritance, because in mul-
tiple inheritance there is code reuse, while interfaces provide no code reuse. 
This is an important difference, because code reuse is one of the primary bene-
fits of inheritance. Java provides one way to partially avoid this deficiency. One 
of the implemented interfaces could be replaced by an abstract class, which 
could include code that could be inherited, thereby providing some code reuse.
One problem with interfaces being a replacement for multiple inheritance 
is the following: If a class attempts to implement two interfaces and both define 
methods that have the same name and protocol, there is no way to implement 
both in the class.

As an example of an interface, consider the sort method of the  standard 
Java class,  Array. Any class that uses this method must provide an imple-
mentation of a method to compare the elements to be sorted. The generic 
 Comparable interface provides the protocol for this comparing method, which 
is named compareTo. The code for the Comparable interface is as follows:

public interface Comparable <T> {
    public int compareTo(T b);
}

The  compareTo  method  must  return  a  negative  integer  if  the  object 
through which it is called belongs before the parameter object, zero if they 
are equal, and a positive integer if the parameter belongs before the object 
through which compareTo was called. A class that implements the Comparable 

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   511

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
512 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

interface can sort the contents of any array of objects of the generic type, as 
long as the implemented compareTo method for the generic type is imple-
mented and provides the appropriate value. Interfaces have become a common 
substitute for multiple inheritance. Some form of interfaces are now part of C#, 
Swift, Ruby, and Ada.

In  addition  to  interfaces,  Java  also  supports  abstract  classes,  similar  to 
those of C++. The abstract methods of a Java abstract class are represented as 
just the method’s header, which includes the abstract reserved word. The 
abstract class is also marked abstract. Of course, abstract classes cannot be 
instantiated.

Chapter 14 illustrates the use of interfaces in Java event handling.

12.4.3.3  Dynamic Binding

In C++, a method must be defined as virtual to allow dynamic binding. In Java, 
all method calls are dynamically bound unless the called method has been 
defined as final, in which case it cannot be overridden and all bindings are 
static. Static binding is also used if the method is static or private, both of 
which disallow overriding.

12.4.3.4  Nested Classes

Java has several varieties of nested classes, all of which have the advantage of 
being hidden from all classes in their package, except for the nesting class. Non-
static classes that are nested directly in another class are called inner classes. 
Each instance of an inner class must have an implicit pointer to the instance 
of its nesting class to which it belongs. This gives the methods of the nested 
class access to all of the members of the nesting class, including the private 
members. Static nested classes do not have this pointer, so they cannot access 
members of the nesting class. Therefore, static nested classes in Java are like 
the nested classes of C++.

Though it seems odd in a static-scoped language, the members of the 
inner class, even the private members, are accessible in the outer class. Such 
references must include the variable that references the inner class object. For 
example, suppose the outer class creates an instance of the inner class with the 
following statement:

myInner = this.new Inner();

Then, if the inner class defines a variable named sum, it can be referenced in 
the outer class as myInner.sum.

An instance of a nested class can only exist within an instance of its nesting 
class. Nested classes can also be anonymous. Anonymous nested classes have 
complex syntax but are really only an abbreviated way to define a class that is 
used from just one location. An example of an anonymous nested class appears 
in Chapter 14.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   512

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
12.4  Support for Object-Oriented Programming in Specific Languages  

  513

A local nested class is defined in a method of its nesting class. Local 
nested classes are never defined with an access specifier (private or public). 
Their scope is always limited to their nesting class. A method in a local nested 
class can access the variables defined in its nesting class and the final variables 
defined in the method in which the local nested class is defined. The members 
of a local nested class are visible only in the method in which the local nested 
class is defined.

12.4.3.5  Evaluation

Java’s design for supporting object-oriented programming is similar to that of 
C++, but it employs more consistent adherence to object-oriented principles. 
Java does not allow parentless classes and uses dynamic binding as the “normal” 
way to bind method calls to method definitions. This, of course, increases exe-
cution time slightly over languages in which many method bindings are static. 
At the time this design decision was made, however, most Java programs were 
interpreted, so interpretation time made the extra binding time insignificant. 
Access controls for the contents of a class definition are rather simple when 
compared with the jungle of access controls of C++, ranging from derivation 
controls to friend functions. Finally, Java uses interfaces to provide a form of 
support for multiple inheritance, which does not have all of the drawbacks of 
actual multiple inheritance.

12.4.4  C#

C#’s support for object-oriented programming is similar to that of Java.

12.4.4.1  General Characteristics

C# includes both classes and structs, with the classes being very similar to Java’s 
classes and the structs being somewhat less powerful constructs. One important 
difference is that structs are value types; that is, they are stack dynamic. This 
could cause the problem of object slicing, but this is prevented by the restric-
tion that structs cannot be subclassed. More details of how C# structs differ 
from its classes appeared in Chapter 11.

12.4.4.2  Inheritance

C# uses the syntax of C++ for defining classes. For example,

public class  NewClass : ParentClass { . . . }

A method inherited from the parent class can be replaced in the derived 
class by marking its definition in the subclass with new. The new method hides 
the method of the same name in the parent class to normal access. However, 

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   513

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
514 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

the parent class version can still be called by prefixing the call with base. For 
example,

base.Draw();

As with Java, subclasses can be subtypes. C#’s support for interfaces is the 

same as that of Java. It does not support multiple inheritance.

12.4.4.3  Dynamic Binding

To allow dynamic binding of method calls to methods in C#, both the base 
method and its corresponding methods in derived classes must be specially 
marked. The base class method must be marked with virtual, as in C++. To 
make clear the intent of a method in a subclass that has the same name and 
protocol as a virtual method in an ancestor class, C# requires that such meth-
ods  be  marked  override  if  they  are  to  override  the  parent  class  virtual 
method.13 For example, the C# version of the C++ Shape class that appears in 
Section 12.4.2.3 is as follows:

public class Shape {
  public virtual void Draw() { . . . }
  . . .
}
public class Circle : Shape {
  public override void Draw() { . . . }
  . . .
}
public class Rectangle : Shape {
  public override void Draw() { . . . }
  . . .
}
public class Square : Rectangle {
  public override void Draw() { . . . }
  . . .
}

C# includes abstract methods similar to those of C++, except that they 
are specified with different syntax. For example, the following is a C# abstract 
method:

abstract public void Draw();

A class that includes at least one abstract method is an abstract class, and 
every abstract class must be marked  abstract. Abstract classes cannot be 

13.  Recall that this can be specified in Java with the annotation @Override.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   514

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
 
12.4  Support for Object-Oriented Programming in Specific Languages  

  515

instantiated. It follows that any subclass of an abstract class that will be instan-
tiated must implement all abstract methods that it inherits.

As  with  Java,  all  C#  classes  are  ultimately  derived  from  a  single  root 
class, Object. The Object class defines a collection of methods, including 
ToString, Finalize, and Equals, which are inherited by all C# types.

12.4.4.4  Nested Classes

A C# class that is directly nested in a class behaves like a Java static nested class 
(which is like a nested class in C++). Like C++, C# does not support nested 
classes that behave like the nonstatic nested classes of Java.

12.4.4.5  Evaluation

Because  C#  is  a  recently  designed  C-based  object-oriented  language,  one 
should expect that its designers learned from their predecessors and duplicated 
the successes of the past and remedied some of the problems. One result of this, 
coupled with the few problems with Java, is that the differences between C#’s 
support for object-oriented programming and that of Java are relatively minor. 
The availability of structs in C#, which Java does not have, can be considered an 
improvement. Like that of Java, C#’s support for object-oriented programming 
is simpler than that of C++, which many consider an improvement.

12.4.5  Ruby

As stated previously, Ruby is a pure object-oriented programming language 
in the sense of Smalltalk. Virtually everything in the language is an object 
and all computation is accomplished through message passing. Although pro-
grams have expressions that use infix operators and therefore have the same 
appearance as expressions in languages like Java, those expressions actually are 
evaluated through message passing. As is the case with Smalltalk, when one 
writes a + b, it is evaluated by sending the message + to the object referenced 
by a, passing a reference to the object b as a parameter. In other words, a + b 
is implemented as a.+ b.

12.4.5.1  General Characteristics

Ruby class definitions differ from those of languages such as C++ and Java 
in that they are executable. Because of this, they are allowed to remain open 
during execution. A program can add members to a class any number of times, 
simply by providing secondary definitions of the class that include the new 
members. During execution, the current definition of a class is the union of 
all definitions of the class that have been executed. Method definitions are 
also executable, which allows a program to choose between two versions of a 
method definition during execution, simply by putting the two definitions in 
the then and else clause of a selection construct.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   515

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
516 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

Ruby objects are created with new, which implicitly calls a constructor. 
The usual constructor in a Ruby class is named initialize. A constructor in 
a subclass can initialize the data members of the parent class that have setters 
defined. This is done by calling super with the initial values as actual parame-
ters. super calls the method in the parent class that has the same name as the 
method in which the call to super appears.

Ruby classes can be nested, but the nested class has no special access to the 

variables or methods of the nesting class.

All variables in Ruby are references to objects, and all are typeless. Recall 

that the names of all instance variables in Ruby begin with an at sign (@).

In a clear departure from the other common programming languages, 
access control in Ruby is different for data than it is for methods. All instance 
data has private access by default, and that cannot be changed. Therefore, 
no subclass in Ruby is a subtype. If external access to an instance variable is 
required, accessor methods must be defined. For example, consider the follow-
ing skeletal class definition:

class MyClass

# A constructor
  def initialize
    @one = 1
    @two = 2
  end

# A getter for @one
  def one
    @one
  end

# A setter for @one
  def one=(my_one)
    @one = my_one
  end

end  # of class MyClass

The equal sign (=) attached to the name of the setter method means that its 
variable is assignable. So, all setter methods have equal signs attached to their 
names. The body of the one getter method illustrates the Ruby design of meth-
ods returning the value of the last expression evaluated when there is no return 
statement. In this case, the value of @one is returned.

Because getter and setter methods are so frequently needed, Ruby provides 
shortcuts for creating them. If one wants a class to have getter methods for the 
two instance variables, @one and @two, those getters can be specified with the 
single statement in the class:

attr_reader :one, :two

attr_reader is actually a function call, using :one and :two as the actual 
parameters. Preceding a variable with a colon (:) causes the variable name to 

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   516

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
12.4  Support for Object-Oriented Programming in Specific Languages  

  517

be used, rather than dereferencing it to the object to which it refers. Instead of 
passing a value or an address, the text of the variable’s name is passed. This is 
exactly how macro parameters are passed.

The function that similarly creates setters is called attr_writer. This 

function has the same parameter profile as attr_reader.

The  functions  for  creating  getter  and  setter  methods  are  so  named 
because they provide the protocol for objects of the class, which then are called 
 attributes. So, the attributes of a class define the data interface (the data made 
public through accessor methods) to objects of the class.

Class variables, which are specified by preceding their names with two 
at signs (@@), are private to the class and its instances. That privacy cannot be 
changed. Also, unlike global and instance variables, class variables must be 
initialized before they are used.

12.4.5.2  Inheritance

Subclasses are defined in Ruby using the less-than symbol (<), rather than the 
colon of C++. For example,

class MySubClass < BaseClass

One distinct thing about the method access controls of Ruby is that they 
can be changed in a subclass, simply by calling the access control functions. 
This means that two subclasses of a base class can be defined so that objects of 
one of the subclasses can access a method defined in the base class, but objects 
of the other subclass cannot. Also, this allows one to change the access of a 
publicly accessible method in the base class to a privately accessible method in 
the subclass.

12.4.5.3  Dynamic Binding

Support for dynamic binding in Ruby is the same as it is in Smalltalk.  Variables 
are not typed; rather, they are all references to objects of any class. So, all 
variables are polymorphic and all bindings of method calls to methods are 
dynamic.

12.4.5.4  Evaluation

Because Ruby is an object-oriented programming language in the purest sense, 
its support for object-oriented programming is obviously adequate. However, 
access control to class members is weaker than that of C++. Ruby does not 
support abstract classes or interfaces, although its mixins are closely related 
to interfaces. Finally, in large part because Ruby is interpreted, its execution 
efficiency is far worse than that of the compiled languages.

Table 12.1 summarizes how the designers of the languages in this section 

chose to deal with the design issues described in Section 12.3.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   517

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
518 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

s
t
c
e
j
b
o
e
r
a

a
t
a
d
l
l

A

s
e
p
y
t

e
v
i
t
i

m

i
r
P

s
t
c
e
j
b
o
s
u
l
p

s
e
p
y
t

e
v
i
t
i

m

i
r
P

s
t
c
e
j
b
o
s
u
l
p

e
r
a

s
e
s
s
a
l
c
b
u
s
o
N

d
n
a

e
b
n
a
c

y
e
h
T

d
n
a

e
b
n
a
c

y
e
h
T

s
e
p
y
t
b
u
s

e
r
a

y
l
l
a
u
s
u

e
r
a

y
l
l
a
u
s
u

h
t
i

w
s
t
c
e
f
f
e

e
m
o
s

t
u
b

,
y
l

n
o
e
l
g
n
S

i

s
e
l
u
d
o
m

e
r
a

s
t
c
e
j
b
o
l
l

A

;
c
i
m
a
n
y
d
p
a
e
h

h
t
i

w
s
t
c
e
f
f
e

e
m
o
s

t
u
b

,
y
l
n
o
e
l
g
n
i
S

s
e
c
a
f
r
e
t
n
i

e
r
a

s
t
c
e
j
b
o
l
l

A

;
c
i
m
a
n
y
d
p
a
e
h

t
i
c
i
l
p
x
e

s
i

n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
 a

t
i
c
i
l
p
x
e

s
i
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
 a

s
i

n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
a
e
 d
d
n
a

s
i

n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
a
e
 d
d
n
a

t
i
c
i
l
p
m

i

t
i
c
i
l
p
m

i

h
t
i

w
s
t
c
e
f
f
e

e
m
o
s

t
u
b

,
y
l
n
o
e
l
g
n
i
S

s
e
c
a
f
r
e
t
n
i

e
r
a

s
t
c
e
j
b
o
l
l

A

;
c
i
m
a
n
y
d
p
a
e
h

s
i
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
a
e
 d

s
i
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
 a

d
n
a

t
i
c
i
l
p
x
e

t
i
c
i
l
p
m

i

e
r
a

s
g
n

i
d
n
i
b

d
o
h
t
e
m

l
l

A

c
i
m
a
n
y
d

s
e
Y

s
r
o
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

y
l
t
i
c
i
l
p
m

i

e
r
a

d
e
l
l
a
c

g
n
i
d
n
i
b
d
o
h
t
e

M

r
e
h
t
i
e

e
b
n
a
c

g
n
i
d
n
i
b
d
o
h
t
e

M

r
e
h
t
i
e

e
b
n
a
c

s
r
o
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

y
l
t
i
c
i
l
p
m

i

e
r
a

d
e
l
l
a
c

s
e
Y

s
r
o
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

y
l
t
i
c
i
l
p
m

i

e
r
a

d
e
l
l
a
c

s
e
Y

s
e
p
y
t

e
v
i
t
i

m

i
r
P

s
t
c
e
j
b
o
s
u
l
p

d
n
a

e
b
n
a
c

y
e
h
T

e
h
t

f
i

e
r
a

y
l
l
a
u
s
u

s
i
n
o
i
t
a
v
i
r
e
d

c
i
l
b
u
p

h
t
o
B

d
n
a

e
b
n
a
c

y
e
h
T

e
r
a

y
l
l
a
u
s
u

e
r
a

a
t
a
d
l
l

A

s
t
c
e
j
b
o

p
a
e
h
r
o

,
c
i
m
a
n
y
d

t
i
c
i
l
p
x
e

s
i

n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
a

;
c
i
m
a
n
y
d

s
i

n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
a
e
d
d
n
a

k
c
a
t
s

,
c
i
t
a
t
s

e
b

n
a
c

s
t
c
e
j
b
O

e
r
a

s
t
c
e
j
b
o
l
l

A

;

d
e
t
a
c
o
l
l
a
p
a
e
h

e
r
a
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
a
e
d

d
n
a
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
a

t
i
c
i
l
p
x
e

g
n
i
d
n
i
b
d
o
h
t
e

M

r
e
h
t
i
e

e
b
n
a
c

s
r
o
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

y
l
t
i
c
i
l
p
m

i

e
r
a

d
e
l
l
a
c

s
e
Y

e
r
a

s
g
n

i
d
n

i
 b

d
o
h
t
e
m

l
l

A

c
i
m
a
n
y
d

t
i
c
i
l
p
m

i

Y
B
U
R

#
C

A
V
A
J

+
+
C

K
L
A
T
L
L
A
M
S

y
l

n
o
e
l
g
n
S

i

e
l
p
i
t
l
u
m
d
n
a

e
l
g
n
i
S

s
n
g
i
s
e
D

1
.
2
1

e
l
b
a
T

/

E
U
S
S
I
N
G
I
S
E
D

E
G
A
U
G
N
A
L

f
o
y
t
i
v
i
s
u
l
c
x
E

s
t
c
e
j
b
o

s
e
s
s
a
l
c
b
u
s

e
r
A

?
s
e
p
y
t
b
u
s

d
n
a
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l

A

f
o
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
a
e
d

s
t
c
e
j
b
o

e
c
n
a
t
i
r
e
h
n
i

c
i
t
a
t
s
d
n
a

c
i
m
a
n
y
D

g
n
i
d
n
i
b

y
l
t
i
c
i
l
p
x
e

e
b
t
s
u
m

s
r
o
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

d
e
l
l
a
c

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
a
i
t
i
n
I

o
N

?
s
e
s
s
a
l
c
d
e
t
s
e
N

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   518

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.5 

Implementation of Object-Oriented Constructs 

  519

12.5  Implementation of Object-Oriented Constructs

There are at least two parts of language support for object-oriented program-
ming that pose interesting questions for language implementers: storage struc-
tures for instance variables and the dynamic bindings of messages to methods. 
In this section, we provide a brief look at these.

12.5.1 

Instance Data Storage

In  C++,  classes  are  defined  as  extensions  of  C’s  record  structures—structs. 
This similarity suggests a storage structure for the instance variables of class 
instances—that of a record. This form of this structure is called a class instance 
record (CIR). The structure of a CIR is static, so it is built at compile time and 
used as a template for the creation of the data of class instances. Every class has its 
own CIR. When a derivation takes place, the CIR for the subclass is a copy of that 
of the parent class, with entries for the new instance variables added at the end.
Because the structure of the CIR is static, access to all instance variables 
can be done as it is in records, using constant offsets from the beginning of 
the CIR instance. This makes these accesses as efficient as those for the fields 
of records.

12.5.2  Dynamic Binding of Method Calls to Methods

Methods in a class that are statically bound need not be involved in the CIR for 
the class. However, methods that will be dynamically bound must have entries 
in this structure. Such entries could simply have a pointer to the code of the 
method, which must be set at object creation time. Calls to a method could then 
be connected to the corresponding code through this pointer in the CIR. The 
drawback to this technique is that every instance would need to store pointers 
to all dynamically bound methods that could be called from the instance.

Notice that the list of dynamically bound methods that can be called from 
an instance of a class is the same for all instances of that class. Therefore, the 
list of such methods must be stored only once. So the CIR for an instance 
needs only a single pointer to that list to enable it to find called methods. The 
storage structure for the list is often called a virtual method table (vtable). 
Method calls can be represented as offsets from the beginning of the vtable. 
Polymorphic variables of an ancestor class always reference the CIR of the 
correct type object, so getting to the correct version of a dynamically bound 
method is assured. Consider the following Java example, in which all methods 
are dynamically bound:

public class A {
  public int a, b;
  public void draw() { . . . }
  public int area() { . . . }
}

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   519

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
520 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

public class B extends A {
  public int c, d;
  public void draw() { . . . }
  public void sift() { . . . }
}

The CIRs for the A and B classes, along with their vtables, are shown in Figure 12.7. 
Notice that the method pointer for the area method in B’s vtable points to 
the code for A’s area method. The reason is that B does not override A’s area 
method, so if a client of B calls area, it is the area method inherited from A. 
On the other hand, the pointers for draw and sift in B’s vtable point to B’s 
draw and sift. The draw method is overridden in B and sift is defined as 
an addition in B.

Multiple inheritance complicates the implementation of dynamic binding. 

Consider the following three C++ class definitions:

class A {
  public:
     int a;
     virtual void fun() { . . . }
     virtual void init() { . . . }
};

vtable for A

vtable for B

code for A’s draw

code for A’s area

code for A’s area

code for B’s draw

code for B’s sift

Class instance
Record for A

vtable pointer

a

b

Class instance
Record for B

vtable pointer

a

b

c

d

Figure 12.7

An example of the CIRs with single inheritance

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   520

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
12.5 

Implementation of Object-Oriented Constructs 

  521

 class B {
   public:
     int b;
     virtual void  sum() { . . . }
};
class C : public A, public B {
  public:
    int  c;
    virtual void fun() { . . . }
    virtual void dud() { . . . }
};

The C class inherits the variable a and the init method from the A class. It 
redefines the fun method, although both its fun and that of the parent class 
A are potentially visible through a polymorphic variable (of type A). From B, 
C inherits the variable b and the sum method. C defines its own variable, c, 
and defines an uninherited method, dud. A CIR for C must include A’s data, 
B’s data, and C’s data, as well as some means of accessing all visible methods. 
Under single inheritance, the CIR would include a pointer to a vtable that has 
the addresses of the code of all visible methods. With multiple inheritance, 
however, it is not that simple. There must be at least two different views avail-
able in the CIR—one for each of the parent classes, one of which includes the 
view for the subclass, C. This inclusion of the view of the subclass in the parent 
class’s view is just as in the implementation of single inheritance.

There must also be two vtables: one for the A and C view and one for the B 
view. The first part of the CIR for C in this case can be the C and A view, which 
begins with a vtable pointer for the methods of C and those inherited from A, 
and includes the data inherited from A. Following this in C’s CIR is the B view 
part, which begins with a vtable pointer for the virtual methods of B, which is 
followed by the data inherited from B and the data defined in C. The CIR for 
C is shown in Figure 12.8.

Class instance
Record for C

C and A’s part

B’s part

C’s data

vtable pointer

a

vtable pointer

b

c

Figure 12.8

An example of a subclass CIR with multiple parents

C’s vtable for (C and A part)

C’s vtable (B part)

code for A’s init

code for C’s fun

code for C’s dud

code for B’s sum

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   521

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
522 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

12.6  Reflection

A discussion of ref lection is not a perfect fit into a chapter on object orientation, 
but it is even a worse fit into any other chapter of this book. So, this is where 
we put it.

12.6.1 

Introduction

In general, the later bindings take place in a programming language, the more 
f lexible the language is. For example, the late binding of data types in scripting 
languages and functional languages allows their programs to be more generic 
than those in the static-typed languages. Likewise, the dynamic binding of 
method calls to methods that is part of the object-oriented languages allows 
their programs to be easier to maintain and extend. Among other things, ref lec-
tion provides the possibility of late binding of calls to methods that are outside 
the inheritance hierarchy of the calling code.

12.6.2  What Is Reflection?

A programming language that supports ref lection allows its programs to have 
run-time access to their types and structure and to be able to dynamically 
modify their behavior. To allow a program to examine its types and structure, 
that information must be gathered by the compiler or interpreter and made 
available to the program. Just as information about the structure of a database 
is called metadata, the types and structure of a program are called metadata. 
The process of a program examining its metadata is called introspection.  
A program can modify its behavior dynamically in several different ways: it 
could change its metadata directly, it could use the metadata, or it could inter-
cede in the execution of the program. The first of these is complicated; the 
second is less complex and is common among languages; the third often is 
called intercession.

Some of the primary uses of ref lection are in the construction of software 
tools. A class browser needs to enumerate the classes of a program. Visual 
Integrated Development Environments can use type information to assist a 
developer in building type-correct code. Debuggers must be able to examine 
private fields and methods of classes. Test systems need to be able to discover 
all of the methods of a class to be sure that test data drives all of them.

To illustrate a relatively simple and common use of ref lection, we pose the 
following problem. A zoo has a large area devoted to birds. The f light cage 
for each species includes a plaque that provides general information about the 
inhabitant’s species. Included on the plaque is a small screen onto which a visitor 
with special interest in the species can enter his or her entrance ticket number. 
At the exit to the bird exhibit, the visitor can again enter his or her ticket num-
ber on a small screen, which causes a computer to print pictures of the birds for 
which the visitor previously indicated particular interest. The computer system 
that supports these activities has an object that includes a method that draws a 

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   522

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
12.6  Reflection 

  523

picture of its bird for each of the birds on display. This seems simple enough. 
When a visitor selects a bird at its f light cage, the system places a reference to 
an object associated with that bird in a list. At the exit of the exhibit, the system 
calls the draw method of each object in the visitor’s list. The process is com-
plicated by the fact that the zoo supplies only some of the bird objects. Some 
of them are purchased from third-party vendors and some are donated by zoo 
benefactors. Because of the multiple sources of the bird objects, they do not 
have a common base class (other than Object) and do not implement a common 
interface, so what type references can be saved? One obvious solution is to make 
each bird object the subclass of a base class. References of the base class type 
could be stored in the list and dynamic binding could be used to invoke the 
draw methods. The drawback of this approach is that every bird class would 
need to be modified to make the new classes subclasses of the common base 
class. It would be better if the new bird classes could simply be added to a code 
file without modification. Another possible solution would be to use instance of 
and casting to determine the concrete types of the references. This would add 
much code to the system, increasing its complexity and cost of maintenance. 
A better solution is to use the dynamic binding that is possible with ref lection.

12.6.3  Reflection in Java

Java provides limited support for ref lection. The primary class of the metadata 
is defined in the namespace, java.lang.Class.14 This class has the unfortu-
nately  confusing  name,  Class.  The  Java  run-time  system  instantiates  an 
instance of Class for each object in the program. The Class class provides a 
collection of methods to examine the type information and members of the 
program objects. Class is the access point for all of the ref lection API.

If the program has a reference to an object (not a primitive), the Class 
object of that object can be obtained by calling its getClass method. All classes 
inherit getClass from Object, from which all objects descend. Consider the 
following examples:

float[] totals = new float[100];
Class fltlist = totals.getClass();
Class stg = "hello".getClass();

The value of the variable fltlist will be the Class object of the totals array 
object. The value of stg will be the Class object of String (because "hello" 
is an instance of String).

If there is no object of a class, its Class object can be obtained through 
the class’ name by attaching .class to the name. For example, we could have 
the following:

Class stg = String.class;

14.  It is so named because its instantiations are themselves classes.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   523

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
524 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

If the class has no name, its Class object can still be obtained by attaching 

.class to the class definition. For example, consider the following:

Class intmat = int[][].class;

The .class modifier can also be attached to primitive types. Although 

float.getClass() is illegal, float.class is not.

There are four methods to get the Class of a method. The getMethod method 
searches a class to find a specific public method defined in the class or inherited by 
the class. The getMethods method returns an array of all of the public methods 
defined in a class or inherited by the class. The getDeclaredMethod method 
searches for a specific method declared in a class, including private methods. The 
getDeclaredMethods method returns all of the methods defined in a class.

If the Class object of an object is known and a particular method defined 
by the class of the object is found, that method can be called through the Method 
object of the method with the invoke method. For example, if the Method object 
named method is found with getMethod, it can be called with the following:

method.invoke(...);

We can now develop a solution in Java for the problem posed in Section 12.6.2. 
The heart of this application is a class that defines a method that is passed an 
Object reference. The method determines the class of the passed reference, finds 
a draw method of that class, and calls that method. The solution class is tested with 
a second class, ReflectTest, which creates an array of three Object references 
to classes that represent three different birds. Each of these defines a draw method 
that, when called, displays a message indicating that it was called. Then the test calls 
the class method, passing the elements of the array of references.

The caller method can raise three different exceptions, each of which is 

handled in the method.

// A project to illustrate dynamic method calling
// using reflection in Java
package reflect;
import java.lang.reflect.*;
// A class to test the Reflect class
//  Creates three objects that represent different birds
//  and calls a method that dynamically calls the draw
//  methods of the three bird classes
public class ReflectTest {
   public static void main(String[] args) {
        Object[] birdList = new Object[3];
        birdList[0] = new Bird1();
        birdList[1] = new Bird2();
        birdList[2] = new Bird3();
        Reflect.callDraw(birdList[2]);
        Reflect.callDraw(birdList[0]);
        Reflect.callDraw(birdList[1]);
       }
}

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   524

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
12.6  Reflection 

  525

// A class to define the method that dynamically calls the
//  methods of a passed class object
class Reflect {
    public static void callDraw(Object birdObj) {
        Class cls = birdObj.getClass();
        try {
            // Find the draw method of the given class
            Method method = cls.getMethod("draw");
            // Dynamically call the method
            method.invoke(birdObj);
        }
        // In case the given class does not support draw
        catch (NoSuchMethodException e) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException (
                cls.getName() + "does not support draw");
        }
        // In case the callDraw cannot call draw
        catch (IllegalAccessException e) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException (
                "Insufficient access permissions to call" +
                "draw in class " + cls.getName());
        }
        // In case draw throws an exception
        catch (InvocationTargetException e) {
            throw new RuntimeException(e);
        }
      }
}
class Bird1 {
  public void draw() {
      System.out.println("This is draw from Bird1");
  }
}
class Bird2 {
    public void draw() {
        System.out.println("This is draw from Bird2");
    }
}
class Bird3 {
    public void draw() {
        System.out.println("This is draw from Bird3");
    }
]

The output of this program is as follows:

This is the draw from Bird3
This is the draw from Bird1
This is the draw from Bird2

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   525

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
526 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

12.6.4  Reflection in C#

Support for ref lection in C# is similar to that of Java, with a few important 
differences. In C#, as in all .NET languages, the compiler places the interme-
diate code, written in Common Intermediate Language (CIL), in an assembly, 
which could include several files. An assembly also contains an assembly version 
number and the metadata for all classes defined in the assembly, as well as for 
all external classes it uses.

Instead of the java.lang.Class namespace, System.Type is used in 
.NET; instead of java.lang.reflect, System.Reflection is used. Rather 
than the getClass method, getType is used to get the class of an instance. 
Also, the .NET languages use the typeof operator in place of the .class field 
used in Java. Following is a C# version of the Java project shown above:

using System;
using System.Reflection;
namespace TestReflect
{
// A project to illustrate dynamic method calling
// using reflection in C#
// A class to test the Reflect class
//  Creates three objects that represent different birds
//  and calls a method that dynamically calls the draw
//  methods of the three bird classes
public class ReflectTest {
   public static void Main(String[] args) {
        Object[] birdList = new Object[3];
        birdList[0] = new Bird1();
        birdList[1] = new Bird2();
        birdList[2] = new Bird3();
        Reflect.callDraw(birdList[2]);
        Reflect.callDraw(birdList[0]);
        Reflect.callDraw(birdList[1]);
        }
}
// A class to define the method that dynamically calls the
//  methods of a passed class object
class Reflect {
    public static void callDraw(Object birdObj) {
        Type typ = birdObj.GetType();
            // Find the draw method of the given class
            MethodInfo method = typ.GetMethod("draw");
            // Dynamically call the method
            method.Invoke(birdObj, null);
    }
}
class Bird1 {
    public void draw() {
        Console.WriteLine("This is draw from Bird1");
    }
}

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   526

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
12.6  Reflection 

  527

class Bird2 {
    public void  draw() {
        Console.WriteLine("This is draw from Bird2");
    }
}
class Bird3 {
    public void draw() {
        Console.WriteLine("This is draw from Bird3");
    }
}
}

Our simple example of dynamic method binding shows just one of the 

many uses of ref lection.

In addition to the methods and fields of a class, the following program 
elements can be accessed with ref lection in both Java and C#: class modifiers, 
such as public, static, and final, constructors, method parameter types, and 
implemented interfaces. Also, a description of the inheritance path of a class 
can be introspected. In C#, but not Java, the names of the formal parameters 
of methods can be discovered.

One significant difference between Java’s ref lection and that of C# is the 
System.Reflection.Emit namespace, which is part of .NET. This name-
space provides the ability to create CIL code and an assembly to house that 
code. Java provides no such capability, although it can be done with tools from 
other suppliers.

Although ref lection adds a variety of capabilities to the static-typed lan-

guages Java and C#, the user of ref lection must be aware of its downsides:

•  Performance nearly always suffers with the use of ref lection. Resolving 
types, methods, and fields at run time are not part of the cost of running 
nonref lective code. Also, when types are dynamically resolved, some opti-
mizations cannot be done on the code.

•  Ref lection exposes private fields and methods, which violate the rules of 
abstraction and information hiding, and also may result in unexpected side 
effects and adversely affect portability.

•  Although the advantage of early type checking is widely accepted, the late 
binding that is possible with ref lection obviously negates that advantage.

•  Some ref lective operations may not work when the code is run under a 
security manager, also making it non-portable. One such security environ-
ment is that of running applets. In most cases, if a problem can be solved 
without ref lection, ref lection should not be used.

Ref lection is an integral part of most dynamically typed languages. In 
LISP, ref lection is routinely used and the dynamic construction and execution 
of code is not uncommon. In other interpreted languages, such as JavaScript, 
Perl, and Python, the symbol table is kept during interpretation, providing all 
useful type information.

In Python, for example, the type method returns the type of a given value. 
For example, type([7, 14, 21]) is list. The isinstance method returns 

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   527

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
528 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

a Boolean value if its first parameter has the type named in its second parameter. 
For example, isinstance(17, int) returns True. The callable function is 
used to determine whether an expression returns a function object. The dir func-
tion returns the list of attributes, both data and methods, of its parameter object.

S U M M A R Y

Object-oriented programming is based on three fundamental concepts: abstract 
data types, inheritance, and dynamic bindinwg. Object-oriented programming 
languages support the paradigm with classes, methods, objects, and message 
passing.

The discussion of object-oriented programming languages in this chap-
ter revolves around seven design issues: exclusivity of objects, subclasses and 
subtypes, type checking and polymorphism, single and multiple inheritance, 
dynamic binding, explicit or implicit deallocation of objects, and nested classes.
Smalltalk is a pure object-oriented language—everything is an object and 
all computation is accomplished through message passing. All type checking 
and binding of messages to methods is dynamic, and all inheritance is single. 
Smalltalk has no explicit deallocation operation.

C++  provides  support  for  data  abstraction,  inheritance,  and  optional 
dynamic binding of messages to methods, along with all of the conventional 
features of C. This means that it has two distinct type systems. C++ provides 
multiple inheritance and explicit object deallocation. It includes a variety of 
access controls for the entities in classes, some of which prevent subclasses from 
being subtypes. Both constructor and destructor methods can be included in 
classes; both are usually implicitly called.

While Smalltalk’s dynamic type binding provides somewhat more pro-

gramming f lexibility than the hybrid language C++, it is far less efficient.

Unlike C++, Java is not a hybrid language; it is meant to support only 
object-oriented programming. Java has both primitive scalar types and classes. 
All objects are allocated from the heap and are accessed through reference vari-
ables. There is no explicit object deallocation operation—garbage collection is 
used. The only subprograms are methods, and they can be called only through 
objects or classes. Only single inheritance is directly supported, although a kind 
of multiple inheritance is possible using interfaces. All binding of messages to 
methods is dynamic, except in the case of methods that cannot be overridden. In 
addition to classes, Java includes packages as a second encapsulation construct.
C#, which is based on C++ and Java, supports object-oriented program-
ming. Objects can be instantiated from either classes or structs. The struct 
objects are stack dynamic and do not support inheritance. Methods in a derived 
class can call the hidden methods of the parent class by including base on the 
method name. Methods that can be overridden must be marked virtual, and 
the overriding methods must be marked with override. All classes (and all 
primitives) are derived from Object.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   528

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
Review Questions 

  529

Ruby is an object-oriented scripting language in which all data are objects. 
As with Smalltalk, all objects are heap allocated and all variables are typeless 
references to objects. All constructors are named initialize. All instance data 
are private, but getter and setter methods can be easily included. The collection 
of all instance variables for which access methods have been provided forms 
the public interface to the class. Such instance data are called attributes. Ruby 
classes are dynamic in the sense that they are executable and can be changed at 
any time. Ruby supports only single inheritance.

The instance variables of a class are stored in a CIR, the structure of which 
is static. Subclasses have their own CIRs, as well as the CIR of their parent 
class. Dynamic binding is supported with a virtual method table, which stores 
pointers  to  specific  methods.  Multiple  inheritance  greatly  complicates  the 
implementation of CIRs and virtual method tables.

Ref lection is a process by which a program can access its classes and types 
and possibly dynamically change them to affect program behavior. One of the 
primary uses of ref lection is in the construction of software tools, such as visual 
program construction tools, debuggers, and test systems. The class and type 
information, called metadata, is collected by the compiler or interpreter for 
the language. In Java, the class information, such as the methods of the class, 
are available in the Class object of a class. Support for ref lection in C#, which 
is similar to that of Java, is available in the System.Reflection namespace.

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  Describe the three characteristic features of object-oriented languages.

2.  What is the difference between a class variable and an instance variable?

3.  What is multiple inheritance?

4.  What is a polymorphic variable?
5.  What is an overriding method?
6.  Describe a situation where dynamic binding is a great advantage over 

static binding.

7.  What is a virtual method?

8.  What is an abstract method? What is an abstract class?

9.  Describe brief ly the seven design issues used in this chapter for object-

oriented languages.

10.  What is a nesting class?

11.  What is the message protocol of an object?

12.  From where are Smalltalk objects allocated?

13.  Explain how Smalltalk messages are bound to methods. When does this 

take place?

14.  What type checking is done in Smalltalk? When does it take place?

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   529

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
530 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

15.  What kind of inheritance, single or multiple, does Smalltalk support?

16.  What are the two most important effects that Smalltalk has had on 

computing?

17.  In essence, all Smalltalk variables are of a single type. What is that type?

18.  From where can C++ objects be allocated?

19.  How are C++ heap-allocated objects deallocated?

20.  Are all C++ subclasses subtypes? If so, explain. If not, why not?

21.  Under what circumstances is a C++ method call statically bound to a 

method?

22.  What drawback is there to allowing designers to specify which methods 

can be statically bound?

23.  What are the differences between private and public derivations in C++?

24.  What is a friend function in C++?

25.  What is a pure virtual function in C++?

26.  How are parameters sent to a superclass’s constructor in C++?

27.  What is the single most important practical difference between Smalltalk 

and C++?

28.  How is the type system of Java different from that of C++?

29.  From where can Java objects be allocated?

30.  What is boxing?

31.  How are Java objects deallocated?

32.  Are all Java subclasses subtypes?

33.  How are superclass constructors called in Java?

34.  Under what circumstances is a Java method call statically bound to a 

method?

35.  In what way do overriding methods in C# syntactically differ from their 

counterparts in C++?

36.  How can the parent version of an inherited method that is overridden in 

a subclass be called in that subclass in C#?

37.  How does Ruby implement primitive types, such as those for integer and 

f loating-point data?

38.  How are getter methods defined in a Ruby class?

39.  What access controls does Ruby support for instance variables?

40.  What access controls does Ruby support for methods?

41.  Are all Ruby subclasses subtypes?
42.  Does Ruby support multiple inheritance?
43.  What does ref lection allow a program to do?
44.  In the context of ref lection, what is metadata?
45.  What is introspection?

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   530

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
 
Problem Set 

  531

46.  What is intercession?

47.  What class in Java stores information about classes in a program?

48.  For what is the Java name extension .class used?

49.  What does the Java getMethods method do?

50.  For what is the C# namespace System.Reflection.Emit used?

P R O B L E M   S E T

1.  What important part of support for object-oriented programming is 

missing in SIMULA 67?

2.  Explain the principle of substitution.

3.  Explain the ways subclasses can be created that are not subtypes.

4.  Compare the dynamic binding of C++ and Java.

5.  Compare the class entity access controls of C++ and Java.

6.  Compare the multiple inheritance of C++ with that provided by 

interfaces in Java.

7.  What is one programming situation where multiple inheritance has a 

significant advantage over interfaces?

8.  Explain the two problems with abstract data types that are ameliorated 

by inheritance.

9.  Describe the categories of changes that a subclass can make to its parent 

class.

10.  Explain one disadvantage of inheritance.

11.  Explain the advantages and disadvantages of having all values in a 

language be objects.

12.  What exactly does it mean for a subclass to have an is-a relationship with 

its parent class?

13.  Describe the issue of how closely the parameters of an overriding 

method must match those of the method it overrides.

14.  Explain type checking in Smalltalk.

15.  The designers of Java obviously thought it was not worth the additional 

efficiency of allowing any method to be statically bound, as is the case 
with C++. What are the arguments for and against the Java design?

16.  What is the primary reason why all Java objects have a common ancestor?

17.  What is the purpose of the finalize clause in Java?
18.  What would be gained if Java allowed stack-dynamic objects as well as 

heap-dynamic objects? What would be the disadvantage of having both?

19.  What are the differences between a C++ abstract class and a Java 

interface?

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   531

1/5/18   10:54 PM

 
 
 
532 

  Chapter 12  

 Support for Object- Oriented Programming

20.  Explain why allowing a class to implement multiple interfaces in Java and 

C# does not create the same problems that multiple inheritance in C++ 
creates.

21.  Study and explain the issue of why C# does not include Java’s nonstatic 

nested classes.

22.  Can you define a reference variable for an abstract class? What use 

would such a variable have?

23.  Compare the access controls for instance variables in Java and Ruby.

24.  Compare the type error detection for instance variables in Java and 

Ruby.

25.  Explain the downsides of ref lection.

P R O G R A M M I N G   E X E R C I S E S

1.  Rewrite the single_linked_list, stack_2, and queue_2 classes in 
Section 12.5.2 in Java and compare the result with the C++ version in 
terms of readability and ease of programming.

2.  Repeat Programming Exercise 1 using Ruby.

3.  Design and implement a C++ program that defines a base class A, 

which has a subclass B, which itself has a subclass C. The A class must 
implement a method, which is overridden in both B and C. You must 
also write a test class that instantiates A, B, and C and includes three calls 
to the method. One of the calls must be statically bound to A’s method. 
One call must be dynamically bound to B’s method, and one must be 
dynamically bound to C’s method. All of the method calls must be 
through a pointer to class A.

4.  Write a program in C++ that calls both a dynamically bound method and 
a statically bound method a large number of times, timing the calls to 
both of the two. Compare the timing results and compute the difference 
of the time required by the two. Explain the results.

5.  Repeat Programming Exercise 1 using Java, forcing static binding with 

final.

M12_SEBE8029_12_SE_C12.indd   532

1/5/18   10:54 PM
