# Fuente
- archivo: 557-610.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/Robert W. Sebesta - Concepts of Programming Languages-Pearson (2019)/557-610.pdf
- extraido: 2026-03-26T16:13:30

# Contenido

13 

Concurrency

  13.1  Introduction

  13.2  Introduction to Subprogram-Level Concurrency

  13.3  Semaphores

  13.4  Monitors

  13.5  Message Passing

  13.6  Ada Support for Concurrency

  13.7  Java Threads

  13.8  C# Threads

  13.9  Concurrency in Functional Languages

 13.10  Statement-Level Concurrency

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   533

1/5/18   10:56 PM

533

534 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

T his chapter begins with introductions to the various kinds of concurrency at 

the subprogram, or unit level, and at the statement level. Included is a brief 
description of the most common kinds of multiprocessor computer architec-

tures. Next, a lengthy discussion on unit-level concurrency is presented. This begins 
with a description of the fundamental concepts that must be understood before dis-
cussing the problems and challenges of language support for unit-level concurrency, 
specifically competition and cooperation synchronization. Next, the design issues 
for providing language support for concurrency are described. Following this is a 
detailed discussion of three major approaches to language support for concurrency: 
semaphores,  monitors, and message passing. A pseudocode example program is used 
to  demonstrate how semaphores can be used. Ada and Java are used to illustrate 
monitors; for message passing, Ada is used. The Ada features that support concur-
rency are described in some detail. Although tasks are the focus, protected objects 
(which are effectively monitors) are also discussed. Support for unit-level concurrency 
using threads in Java and C# is then discussed, including approaches to synchroni-
zation. This is followed by brief overviews of support for concurrency in several func-
tional programming languages. The last section of the chapter is a brief discussion 
of  statement-level concurrency, including an introduction to part of the language 
 support provided for it in High-Performance Fortran.

13.1  Introduction

Concurrency in software execution can occur at four different levels: instruc-
tion  level  (executing  two  or  more  machine  instructions  simultaneously), 
statement level (executing two or more high-level language statements simul-
taneously), unit level (executing two or more subprogram units simultane-
ously), and program level (executing two or more programs simultaneously). 
Because no language design issues are involved with them, instruction-level 
and  program-level concurrency are not discussed in this chapter. Concurrency 
at both the subprogram and the statement levels is discussed, with most of the 
focus on the subprogram level.

At first glance, concurrency may appear to be a simple concept, but it 
presents significant challenges to the programmer, the programming language 
designer, and the operating system designer (because much of the support for 
concurrency is provided by the operating system).

Concurrent control mechanisms increase programming f lexibility. They 
were originally invented to be used for particular problems faced in operating 
systems, but they are required for a variety of other programming applications. 
One of the most commonly used programs is Web browsers, whose design is 
based heavily on concurrency. Browsers must perform many different functions 
at the same time, among them sending and receiving data from Web servers, 
rendering text and images on the screen, and reacting to user actions with 
the mouse and the keyboard. Most contemporary browsers use the extra core 
processors that are part of many contemporary personal computers to perform 
some of their processing, for example the interpretation of client-side scripting 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   534

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.1 

Introduction 

  535

code. Another example is the software systems that are designed to simulate 
actual physical systems that consist of multiple concurrent subsystems. For all 
of these kinds of applications, the programming language (or a library or at 
least the operating system) must support unit-level concurrency.

Statement-level concurrency is quite different from concurrency at the unit 
level. From a language designer’s point of view, statement-level concurrency 
is largely a matter of specifying how data should be distributed over multiple 
memories and which statements can be executed concurrently.

The goal of developing concurrent software is to produce scalable and 
portable concurrent algorithms. A concurrent algorithm is scalable if the speed 
of its execution increases when more processors are available. This is important 
because the number of processors sometimes increases with the new genera-
tions of machines. The algorithms must be portable because the lifetime of 
hardware is relatively short. Therefore, software systems should not depend 
on a particular architecture—that is, they should run efficiently on machines 
with different architectures.

The intention of this chapter is to discuss the aspects of concurrency that 
are most relevant to language design issues, rather than to present a definitive 
study of all of the issues of concurrency, including the development of concur-
rent programs. That would clearly be inappropriate for a book on program-
ming languages.

13.1.1  Multiprocessor Architectures

A large number of different computer architectures have more than one proces-
sor and can support some form of concurrent execution. Before beginning to 
discuss concurrent execution of programs and statements, we brief ly describe 
some of these architectures.

The first computers that had multiple processors had one general-purpose 
processor and one or more other processors, often called peripheral proces-
sors, that were used only for input and output operations. This architecture 
allowed those computers, which appeared in the late 1950s, to execute one 
program while concurrently performing input or output for that program or 
other programs.

By  the  early  1960s,  there  were  machines  that  had  multiple  complete 
processors. These processors were used by the job scheduler of the operat-
ing system, which distributed separate jobs from a batch-job queue to the 
separate processors. Systems with this structure supported program-level 
concurrency.

In the mid-1960s, some machines appeared that had several identical par-
tial processors. These were fed instructions from a single instruction stream. 
For example, some machines had two or more f loating-point multipliers, while 
others had two or more complete f loating-point arithmetic units. The compil-
ers for these machines were required to determine which instructions could be 
executed concurrently and to schedule these instructions accordingly. Systems 
with this structure supported instruction-level concurrency.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   535

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
536 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

In 1966, Michael J. Flynn suggested a categorization of computer architec-
tures defined by whether the instruction and data streams were single or mul-
tiple. The names of these were widely used from the 1970s to the early 2000s. 
The two categories that used multiple data streams are defined as follows: 
Computers that have multiple processors that execute the same instruction 
simultaneously, each on different data, are called Single Instruction, Multiple 
Data (SIMD) architecture computers. In an SIMD computer, each proces-
sor has its own local memory. One processor controls the operation of the 
other processors. Because all of the processors, except the controller, execute 
the same instruction at the same time, no synchronization is required in the 
software. Perhaps the most widely used SIMD machines are a category of 
machines called vector processors. They have groups of registers that store 
the operands of a vector operation in which the same instruction is executed on 
the whole group of operands simultaneously. Originally, the kinds of programs 
that could most benefit from this architecture were in scientific computation, 
an area of computing that is often the target of multiprocessor machines. How-
ever, SIMD processors are now used for a variety of application areas, among 
them graphics and video processing. Until recently, most supercomputers were 
vector processors.

Computers that have multiple processors that operate independently but 
whose operations can be synchronized are called Multiple Instruction, Multiple 
Data (MIMD) computers. Each processor in an MIMD computer executes 
its own instruction stream. MIMD computers can appear in two distinct con-
figurations: distributed and shared memory systems. The distributed MIMD 
machines, in which each processor has its own memory, can be either built in 
a single chassis or distributed, perhaps over a large area. The shared-memory 
MIMD machines obviously must provide some means of synchronization to 
prevent memory access clashes. Even distributed MIMD machines require syn-
chronization to operate together on single programs. MIMD computers, which 
are more general than SIMD computers, support unit-level concurrency. The 
primary focus of this chapter is on language design for shared memory MIMD 
computers, which are often called multiprocessors.

With the advent of powerful but low-cost single-chip computers, it became 
possible to have large numbers of these microprocessors connected into phys-
ically small networks within a single chassis. These kinds of computers, which 
often use off-the-shelf microprocessors, are available from a number of differ-
ent manufacturers.

One important reason why software has not evolved faster to make use of 
concurrent machines is that the power of processors has continually increased. 
One of the strongest motivations to use concurrent machines is to increase 
the speed of computation. However, two hardware factors have combined to 
provide faster computation, without requiring any change in the architecture 
of  software  systems.  First,  processor  clock  rates  have  become  faster  with 
each new generation of processors (the generations have appeared roughly 
every 18 months). Second, several different kinds of concurrency have been 
built into the processor architectures. Among these are the pipelining of 
instructions and data from the memory to the processor (instructions are 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   536

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.1 

Introduction 

  537

fetched and decoded for future execution while the current instruction is 
being executed), the use of separate lines for instructions and data, prefetch-
ing of instructions and data, and parallelism in the execution of arithmetic 
operations. All of these are collectively called hidden concurrency. The 
result of the increases in execution speed is that there have been great pro-
ductivity gains without requiring software developers to produce concurrent 
software systems.

However, the situation has changed. The end of the sequence of significant 
increases in the speed of individual processors is now near. Significant increases 
in computing power now result from increases in the number of processors, 
for example large server systems like those run by Google and Amazon and 
scientific research applications. Many other large computing tasks are now run 
on machines with large numbers of relatively small processors.

Another recent advance in computing hardware was the development of 
multiple processors on a single chip, such as with the Intel Core Duo and 
Core Quad chips, which is putting more pressure on software developers to 
make more use of the available multiple processor machines. If they do not, 
the concurrent hardware will be wasted and significant productivity gains will 
not be realized.

13.1.2  Categories of Concurrency

There are two distinct categories of concurrent unit control. The most natural 
category of concurrency is that in which, assuming that more than one proces-
sor is available, several program units from the same program literally execute 
simultaneously. This is physical concurrency. A slight relaxation of this con-
cept of concurrency allows the programmer and the application software to 
assume that there are multiple processors providing actual concurrency, when 
in fact the actual execution of programs is taking place in interleaved fashion on 
a single processor. This is logical concurrency. From the programmer’s and 
language designer’s points of view, logical concurrency is the same as physical 
concurrency. It is the language implementor’s task, using the capabilities of the 
underlying operating system, to map the logical concurrency to the host hard-
ware. Both logical and physical concurrencies allow the concept of concurrency 
to be used as a program design methodology. For the remainder of this chapter, 
the discussion will apply to both physical and logical concurrencies.

One useful technique for visualizing the f low of execution through a pro-
gram is to imagine a thread laid on the statements of the source text of the 
program. Every statement reached on a particular execution is covered by the  
thread  representing  that  execution.  Visually  following  the  thread  through  
the source program traces the execution f low through the executable version of 
the program. Of course, in all but the simplest of programs, the thread follows 
a highly complex path that would be impossible to follow visually. Formally, a 
thread of control in a program is the sequence of program points reached as 
control f lows through the program.

Programs that have coroutines (see Chapter 9) but no concurrent sub-
programs, though they are sometimes called quasi-concurrent, have a single 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   537

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
538 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

thread  of  control.  Programs  executed  with  physical  concurrency  can  have 
multiple threads of control. Each processor can execute one of the threads. 
Although logically concurrent program execution may actually have only a 
single thread of control, such programs can be designed and analyzed only by 
imagining them as having multiple threads of control. A program designed 
to have more than one thread of control is said to be multithreaded. When 
a multithreaded program executes on a single-processor machine, its threads 
are  mapped  onto  a  single  thread.  It  becomes,  in  this  scenario,  a  virtually  
multithreaded program.

Statement-level concurrency is a relatively simple concept. In a common 
use of statement-level concurrency, loops that include statements that oper-
ate on array elements are unwound so that the processing can be distributed 
over multiple processors. For example, a loop that executes 500 repetitions 
and includes a statement that operates on one of 500 array elements may be 
unwound so that each of 10 different processors can simultaneously process 50 
of the array elements.

13.1.3  Motivations for the Use of Concurrency

There are at least four different reasons to design concurrent software systems. 
The first reason is the speed of execution of programs on machines with mul-
tiple processors. These machines provide an effective way of increasing the 
execution speed of programs, provided that the programs are designed to make 
use of the concurrent hardware. There are now a large number of installed 
multiple-processor computers, including many of the personal computers sold 
in the last few years. It is wasteful not to use this hardware capability.

The second reason is that even when a machine has just one processor, a 
program written to use concurrent execution can be faster than the same pro-
gram written for sequential (nonconcurrent) execution. The requirement for 
this to happen is that the program is not compute bound (the sequential version 
does not fully utilize the processor).

The third reason is that concurrency provides a different method of con-
ceptualizing  program  solutions  to  problems.  Many  problem  domains  lend 
themselves naturally to concurrency in much the same way that recursion is 
a natural way to design solutions to some problems. Also, many programs are 
written to simulate physical entities and activities. In many cases, the system 
being simulated includes more than one entity, and the entities do whatever they 
do  simultaneously—for example, aircraft f lying in a controlled airspace, relay 
stations in a communications network, and the various machines in a factory. 
Software that uses concurrency must be used to simulate such systems accurately.
The fourth reason for using concurrency is to program applications that 
are distributed over several machines, either locally or through the Internet. 
Many machines, for example cars, have more than one built-in computer, each 
of which is dedicated to some specific task. In many cases, these collections 
of computers must synchronize their program executions. Internet games are 
another example of software that is distributed over multiple processors.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   538

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.2 

Introduction to Subprogram-Level Concurrency 

  539

Concurrency is now used in numerous everyday computing tasks. Web 
servers process document requests concurrently. Web browsers now use sec-
ondary core processors to run graphic processing and to interpret program-
ming code embedded in documents. In every operating system there are many 
concurrent processes being executed at all times, managing resources, getting 
input from keyboards, displaying output from programs, and reading and writ-
ing external memory devices. In short, concurrency has become a ubiquitous 
part of computing.

13.2  Introduction to Subprogram-Level Concurrency

Before language support for concurrency can be considered, one must under-
stand the underlying concepts of concurrency and the requirements for it to 
be useful. These topics are covered in this section.

13.2.1  Fundamental Concepts

A task is a unit of a program, similar to a subprogram, that can be in concur-
rent execution with other units of the same program. Each task in a program 
can support one thread of control. Tasks are sometimes called processes. In 
some languages, for example Java and C#, certain methods serve as tasks. Such 
methods are executed in objects called threads.

Three characteristics of tasks distinguish them from subprograms. First, a 
task may be implicitly started, whereas a subprogram must be explicitly called. 
Second, when a program unit invokes a task, in some cases it need not wait for 
the task to complete its execution before continuing its own. Third, when the 
execution of a task is completed, control may or may not return to the unit that 
started that execution.

Tasks fall into two general categories: heavyweight and lightweight. Simply 
stated, a heavyweight task executes in its own address space. Lightweight tasks 
all run in the same address space. It is easier to implement lightweight tasks than 
heavyweight tasks. Furthermore, lightweight tasks can be more efficient than 
heavyweight tasks, because less effort is required to manage their execution.

A task can communicate with other tasks through shared nonlocal vari-
ables, through message passing, or through parameters. If a task does not com-
municate with or affect the execution of any other task in the program in any 
way, it is said to be disjoint. Because tasks often work together to create simula-
tions or solve problems and therefore are not disjoint, they must use some form 
of communication to either synchronize their executions or share data or both.
Synchronization is a mechanism that controls the order in which tasks 
execute. Two kinds of synchronization are required when tasks share data: 
cooperation  and  competition.  Cooperation  synchronization  is  required 
between task A and task B when task A must wait for task B to complete some 
specific activity before task A can begin or continue its execution. Competition 
synchronization is required between two tasks when both require the use of 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   539

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
540 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

some resource that cannot be simultaneously used. Specifically, if task A needs 
to access shared data location x while task B is accessing x, task A must wait 
for task B to complete its processing of x. So, for cooperation synchronization, 
tasks may need to wait for the completion of specific processing on which their 
correct operation depends, whereas for competition synchronization, tasks may 
need to wait for the completion of any other processing by any task currently 
occurring on specific shared data.

A simple form of cooperation synchronization can be illustrated by a com-
mon problem called the producer-consumer problem. This problem orig-
inated in the development of operating systems, in which one program unit 
produces some data value or resource and another uses it. Produced data are 
usually placed in a storage buffer by the producing unit and removed from that 
buffer by the consuming unit. The sequence of stores to and removals from the 
buffer must be synchronized. The consumer unit must not be allowed to take 
data from the buffer if the buffer is empty. Likewise, the producer unit cannot 
be allowed to place new data in the buffer if the buffer is full. This is a problem 
of cooperation synchronization because the users of the shared data structure 
must cooperate if the buffer is to be used correctly.

Competition synchronization prevents two tasks from accessing a shared 
data structure at exactly the same time—a situation that could destroy the 
integrity of that shared data. To provide competition synchronization, mutually 
exclusive access to the shared data must be guaranteed.

To clarify the competition problem, consider the following scenario: Sup-
pose task A has the statement TOTAL  +=  1, where TOTAL is a shared integer 
variable. Furthermore, suppose task B has the statement TOTAL *= 2. Task A 
and task B could try to change TOTAL at the same time.

At the machine language level, each task may accomplish its operation on 

TOTAL with the following three-step process:

1.  Fetch the value of TOTAL.

2.  Perform the arithmetic operation.

3.  Put the new value back in TOTAL.

Without competition synchronization, given the previously described opera-
tions performed by tasks A and B on TOTAL, four different values could result, 
depending on the order of the steps of the operations. Assume TOTAL has the 
value 3 before either A or B attempts to modify it. If task A completes its oper-
ation before task B begins, the value will be 8, which is assumed here to be 
correct. But if both A and B fetch the value of TOTAL before either task puts its 
new value back, the result will be incorrect. If A puts its value back first, the 
value of TOTAL will be 6. This case is shown in Figure 13.1. If B puts its value 
back first, the value of TOTAL will be 4. Finally, if B completes its operation 
before task A begins, the value will be 7. A situation that leads to these problems 
is sometimes called a race condition, because two or more tasks are racing to 
use the shared resource and the behavior of the program depends on which 
task arrives first (and wins the race). The importance of competition synchro-
nization should now be clear.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   540

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
Figure 13.1

The need for 
 competition 
synchronization

13.2 

Introduction to Subprogram-Level Concurrency 

  541

Value of TOTAL 3

4

6

Task A

Task B

Time

Fetch
TOTAL

Add 1

Store
TOTAL

Fetch
TOTAL

Multiply
by 2

Store
TOTAL

One general method for providing mutually exclusive access (to support 
competition synchronization) to a shared resource is to consider the resource 
to be something that a task can possess and allow only a single task to possess 
it at a time. To gain possession of a shared resource, a task must request it. 
Possession will be granted only when no other task has possession. While a 
task possesses a resource, all other tasks are prevented from having access to 
that resource. When a task is finished with a shared resource that it possesses, 
it must relinquish that resource so it can be made available to other tasks.

Three  methods  of  providing  for  mutually  exclusive  access  to  a  shared 
resource  are  semaphores,  which  are  discussed  in  Section  13.3;  monitors, 
which are discussed in Section 13.4; and message passing, which is discussed 
in  Section 13.5.

Mechanisms for synchronization must be able to delay task execution. Syn-
chronization imposes an order of execution on tasks that is enforced with these 
delays. To understand what happens to tasks through their lifetimes, we must 
consider how task execution is controlled. Regardless of whether a machine 
has a single processor or more than one, there is always the possibility of there 
being more tasks than there are processors. A run-time system program called 
a scheduler manages the sharing of processors among the tasks. If there were 
never any interruptions and tasks all had the same priority, the scheduler could 
simply give each task a time slice, such as 0.1 second, and when a task’s turn 
came, the scheduler could let it execute on a processor for that amount of time. 
Of course, there are several events that complicate this, for example, task delays 
for synchronization and for input or output operations. Because input and 
output operations are very slow relative to the processor’s speed, a task is not 
allowed to keep a processor while it waits for completion of such an operation.

Tasks can be in several different states:

1.  New: A task is in the new state when it has been created but has not yet 

begun its execution.

2.  Ready: A ready task is ready to run but is not currently running. Either 
it has not been given processor time by the scheduler, or it had run 
previously but was blocked in one of the ways described in Paragraph 4 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   541

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
542 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

of this subsection. Tasks that are ready to run are stored in a queue that 
is often called the task-ready queue.

3.  Running: A running task is one that is currently executing; that is, it has 

a processor and its code is being executed.

4.  Blocked: A task that is blocked has been running, but that execution was 
interrupted by one of several different events, the most common of 
which is an input or output operation. In addition to input and output, 
some languages provide operations for the user program to specify that 
a task be blocked.

5.  Dead: A dead task is no longer active in any sense. A task dies when its 

execution is completed or it is explicitly killed by the program.

A f low diagram of the states of a task is shown in Figure 13.2.
One important issue in task execution is the following: How is a ready 
task chosen to move to the running state when the task currently running has 
become blocked or whose time slice has expired? Several different algorithms 

Figure 13.2

Flow diagram of task 
states

New

Ready

Time slice
expiration

Scheduled

Running

Input/output
completed

Completed

Input/output

Dead

Blocked

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   542

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.2 

Introduction to Subprogram-Level Concurrency 

  543

have been used for making this choice, some based on specifiable priority levels. 
The algorithm that does the choosing is implemented in the scheduler.

Associated with the concurrent execution of tasks and the use of shared 
resources is the concept of liveness. In the environment of sequential programs, 
a program has the liveness characteristic if it continues to execute, eventually 
leading to completion. In more general terms, liveness means that if some 
event—say, program completion—is supposed to occur, it will occur, eventu-
ally. That is, progress is continually made. In a concurrent environment and 
with shared resources, the liveness of a task can cease to exist, meaning that the 
program cannot continue and thus will never terminate.

For example, suppose task A and task B both need the shared resources X 
and Y to complete their work. Furthermore, suppose that task A gains posses-
sion of X and task B gains possession of Y. After some execution, task A needs 
resource Y to continue, so it requests Y but must wait until B releases it. Like-
wise, task B requests X but must wait until A releases it. Neither relinquishes the 
resource it possesses, and as a result, both lose their liveness, guaranteeing that 
execution of the program will never complete normally. This particular kind of 
loss of liveness is called deadlock. Deadlock is a serious threat to the reliability 
of a program, and therefore its avoidance demands serious consideration in 
both language and program design.

We are now ready to discuss some of the linguistic mechanisms for pro-

viding concurrent unit control.

13.2.2  Language Design for Concurrency

In some cases, concurrency is implemented through libraries. Among these is 
OpenMP, an applications programming interface to support shared memory 
multiprocessor programming in C, C++, and Fortran on a variety of platforms. 
Our interest in this book, of course, is language support for concurrency. A 
number of languages have been designed to support concurrency, beginning 
with PL/I in the mid-1960s and including the contemporary languages Ada 95, 
Java, C#, F#, Python, and Ruby.1

13.2.3  Design Issues

The most important design issues for language support for concurrency have 
already been discussed at length: competition and cooperation synchronization. 
In addition to these, there are several design issues of secondary importance. 
Prominent among them is how an application can inf luence task scheduling. 
Also, there are the issues of how and when tasks start and end their executions, 
and how and when they are created.

1.  In the cases of Python and Ruby, programs are interpreted, so there only can be logical 

 concurrency. Even if the machine has multiple processors, these programs cannot make use 
of more than one.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   543

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
544 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

Keep in mind that our discussion of concurrency is intentionally incom-
plete, and only the most important of the language design issues related to 
support for concurrency are discussed.

The following sections discuss three alternative approaches to the design 

issues for concurrency: semaphores, monitors, and message passing.

13.3  Semaphores

A  semaphore  is  a  simple  mechanism  that  can  be  used  to  provide  synchro-
nization of tasks. Although semaphores are an early approach to providing 
synchronization, they are still used, both in contemporary languages and in 
library-based concurrency support systems. In the following paragraphs, we 
describe semaphores and discuss how they can be used for this purpose.

13.3.1 

Introduction

In an effort to provide competition synchronization through mutually exclu-
sive access to shared data structures, Edsger Dijkstra devised semaphores in 
1965 (Dijkstra, 1968b). Semaphores can also be used to provide cooperation 
synchronization.

To provide limited access to a data structure, guards can be placed around 
the code that accesses the structure. A guard is a linguistic device that allows 
the guarded code to be executed only when a specified condition is true. So, 
a guard can be used to allow only one task to access a particular shared data 
structure at a time. A semaphore is an implementation of a guard. Specifically, 
a semaphore is a data structure that consists of an integer and a queue that 
stores task descriptors. A task descriptor is a data structure that stores all of 
the relevant information about the execution state of a task.

An integral part of a guard mechanism is a procedure for ensuring that 
all attempted executions of the guarded code eventually take place. The typ-
ical  approach  is  to  have  requests  for  access  that  occur  when  access  cannot 
be granted or stored in the task descriptor queue, from which they are later 
allowed to leave and execute the guarded code. This is the reason a semaphore 
must have both a counter and a task descriptor queue.

The only two operations provided for semaphores were originally named 
P and V by Dijkstra, after the two Dutch words passeren (to pass) and vrygeren 
(to release) (Andrews and Schneider, 1983). We will refer to these as wait and 
release, respectively, in the remainder of this section.

13.3.2  Cooperation Synchronization

Through much of this chapter, we use the example of a shared buffer used 
by  producers  and  consumers  to  illustrate  the  different  approaches  to  pro-
viding  cooperation  and  competition  synchronization.  For  cooperation 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   544

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.3  Semaphores 

  545

synchronization, such a buffer must have some way of recording both the 
number of empty positions and the number of filled positions in the buffer 
(to prevent buffer underf low and overf low). The counter component of a 
semaphore can be used for this purpose. One semaphore variable—for exam-
ple, emptyspots—can use its counter to maintain the number of empty loca-
tions in a shared buffer used by producers and consumers, and another—say, 
 fullspots—can use its counter to maintain the number of filled locations 
in the buffer. The queues of these semaphores can store the descriptors of 
tasks  that  have  been  forced  to  wait  for  access  to  the  buffer.  The  queue  of 
 emptyspots can store producer tasks that are waiting for available positions 
in the buffer; the queue of fullspots can store consumer tasks waiting for 
values to be placed in the buffer.

Our example buffer is designed as an abstract data type in which all data 
enters the buffer through the subprogram DEPOSIT, and all data leaves the 
buffer through the subprogram FETCH. The DEPOSIT subprogram needs only 
to check with the emptyspots semaphore to see whether there are any empty 
positions. If there is at least one, it can proceed with the DEPOSIT, which must 
have the side effect of decrementing the counter of emptyspots. If the buffer 
is full, the caller to DEPOSIT must be made to wait in the emptyspots queue 
for an empty spot to become available. When the DEPOSIT is complete, the 
DEPOSIT subprogram increments the counter of the fullspots semaphore to 
indicate that there is one more filled location in the buffer.

The FETCH subprogram has the opposite sequence of DEPOSIT. It checks 
the  fullspots semaphore to see whether the buffer contains at least one 
item. If it does, an item is removed and the emptyspots semaphore has its 
counter incremented by 1. If the buffer is empty, the calling task is put in the 
 fullspots queue to wait until an item appears. When FETCH is finished, it 
must increment the counter of emptyspots.

The operations on semaphore types often are not direct—they are done 
through wait and release subprograms. Therefore, the DEPOSIT operation 
just described is actually accomplished in part by calls to wait and release. 
Note that wait and release must be able to access the task-ready queue.

The wait semaphore subprogram is used to test the counter of a given 
semaphore variable. If the value is greater than zero, the caller can carry out 
its operation. In this case, the counter value of the semaphore variable is dec-
remented to indicate that there is now one fewer of whatever it counts. If the 
value of the counter is zero, the caller must be placed on the waiting queue 
of the semaphore variable, and the processor must be given to some other 
ready task.

The release semaphore subprogram is used by a task to allow some other 
task to have one of whatever the counter of the specified semaphore variable 
counts. If the queue of the specified semaphore variable is empty, which means 
no task is waiting, release increments its counter (to indicate there is one 
more of whatever is being controlled that is now available). If one or more 
tasks are waiting, release moves one of them from the semaphore queue to 
the ready queue.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   545

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
546 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

The following are concise pseudocode descriptions of wait and release:

wait(aSemaphore)
if aSemaphore’s counter > 0 then
        decrement aSemaphore’s counter
else
      put the caller in aSemaphore’s queue
      attempt to transfer control to some ready task
      (if the task-ready queue is empty, deadlock occurs)
end if

release(aSemaphore)
if aSemaphore’s queue is empty (no task is waiting) then
        increment aSemaphore’s counter
else
      put the calling task in the task-ready queue
      transfer control to a task from aSemaphore’s queue
end

We can now present an example program that implements cooperation 
synchronization for a shared buffer. In this case, the shared buffer stores inte-
ger values and is a logically circular structure. It is designed for use by possibly 
multiple producer and consumer tasks.

The following pseudocode shows the definition of the producer and con-
sumer tasks. Two semaphores are used to ensure against buffer underf low or 
overf low, thus providing cooperation synchronization. Assume that the buffer 
has length BUFLEN, and the routines that actually manipulate it already exist as 
FETCH and DEPOSIT. Accesses to the counter of a semaphore are specified by 
dot notation. For example, if fullspots is a semaphore, its counter is refer-
enced by fullspots.count.

semaphore fullspots, emptyspots;
fullspots.count = 0;
emptyspots.count = BUFLEN;
task producer;
  loop
  -- produce VALUE --
  wait(emptyspots); 
  DEPOSIT(VALUE);
  release(fullspots);  { increase filled spaces }
  end loop;
end producer;

{ wait for a space }

task consumer;
   loop
   wait(fullspots); 

{ make sure it is not empty }

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   546

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.3  Semaphores 

  547

   FETCH(VALUE);
   release(emptyspots); { increase empty spaces }
   -- consume VALUE --
   end loop
end consumer;

The semaphore fullspots causes the consumer task to be queued to wait 
for a buffer entry if it is currently empty. The semaphore emptyspots causes 
the producer task to be queued to wait for an empty space in the buffer if it 
is currently full.

13.3.3  Competition Synchronization

Our buffer example does not provide competition synchronization. Access to 
the structure can be controlled with an additional semaphore. This semaphore 
need not count anything but can simply indicate with its counter whether the 
buffer is currently being used. The wait statement allows the access only if 
the semaphore’s counter has the value 1, which indicates that the shared buffer 
is not currently being accessed. If the semaphore’s counter has a value of  0, 
there is a current access taking place, and the task is placed in the queue of the  
semaphore.  Notice  that  the  semaphore’s  counter  must  be  initialized  to  1. 
The queues of semaphores must always be initialized to empty before use of  
the queue can begin.

A semaphore that requires only a binary-valued counter, like the one used 
to provide competition synchronization in the following example, is called a 
binary semaphore.

The example pseudocode that follows illustrates the use of semaphores to 
provide both competition and cooperation synchronization for a concurrently 
accessed shared buffer. The  access semaphore is used to ensure mutually 
exclusive access to the buffer. Remember that there may be more than one 
producer and more than one consumer.

semaphore access, fullspots, emptyspots;
access.count = 1;
fullspots.count = 0;
emptyspots.count = BUFLEN;

task producer;
  loop 
  -- produce VALUE --
  wait(emptyspots);      { wait for a space }
  wait(access);          { wait for access }
  DEPOSIT(VALUE);
  release(access);       { relinquish access }
  release(fullspots);    { increase filled spaces }
  end loop;
end producer;

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   547

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
548 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

task consumer;
  loop
  wait(fullspots);      { make sure it is not empty }
  wait(access);         { wait for access }
  FETCH(VALUE);
  release(access);      { relinquish access }
  release(emptyspots);  { increase empty spaces }
  -- consume VALUE --
  end loop
end consumer;

A brief look at this example may lead one to believe that there is a problem. 
Specifically, suppose that while a task is waiting at the wait(access) call in 
consumer, another task takes the last value from the shared buffer. Fortunately, 
this cannot happen, because the wait(fullspots) reserves a value in the buf-
fer for the task that calls it by decrementing the fullspots counter.

There  is  one  crucial  aspect  of  semaphores  that  thus  far  has  not  been 
discussed.  Recall  the  earlier  description  of  the  problem  of  competition 
synchronization: Operations on shared data must not overlap. If a second 
operation begins while an earlier operation is still in progress, the shared 
data can become corrupted. A semaphore is itself a shared data object, so 
the operations on semaphores are also susceptible to the same problem. It 
is therefore essential that semaphore operations be uninterruptible. Many 
computers have uninterruptible instructions that were designed specifically 
for semaphore operations. If such instructions are not available, then using 
semaphores to provide competition synchronization is a serious problem with 
no simple solution.

13.3.4  Evaluation

Using semaphores to provide cooperation synchronization creates an unsafe 
programming environment. There is no way to check statically for the cor-
rectness of their use, which depends on the semantics of the program in which 
they appear. In the buffer example, leaving out the wait(emptyspots) state-
ment of the producer task would result in buffer overf low. Leaving out the 
 wait(fullspots) statement of  the  consumer task would  result in buffer 
underf low. Leaving out either of the releases would result in deadlock. These 
are cooperation synchronization failures.

The reliability problems that semaphores cause in providing coopera-
tion synchronization also arise when using them for competition synchro-
nization. Leaving out the wait(access) statement in either task can cause 
insecure access to the buffer. Leaving out the release(access) statement 
in either task results in deadlock. These are competition synchronization 
failures. Noting the danger in using semaphores, Per Brinch Hansen (1973) 
wrote, “The semaphore is an elegant synchronization tool for an ideal pro-
grammer who never makes mistakes.” Unfortunately, ideal programmers 
are rare.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   548

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.4  Monitors

13.4  Monitors 

  549

One solution to some of the problems of semaphores in a concurrent envi-
ronment is to encapsulate shared data structures with their operations and 
hide their representations—that is, to make shared data structures abstract 
data types with some special restrictions. This solution can provide compe-
tition synchronization without semaphores by transferring responsibility for 
synchronization to the run-time system.

13.4.1 

Introduction

When  the  concepts  of  data  abstraction  were  being  formulated,  the  people 
involved in that effort applied the same concepts to shared data in concurrent 
programming environments to produce monitors. According to Per Brinch 
Hansen (Brinch Hansen, 1977, p. xvi), Edsger Dijkstra suggested in 1971 that 
all synchronization operations on shared data be gathered into a single program 
unit. Brinch Hansen (1973) formalized this concept in the environment of 
operating systems. The following year, Hoare (1974) named these structures 
monitors.

The first programming language to incorporate monitors was Concurrent 
Pascal (Brinch Hansen, 1975). Modula (Wirth, 1977), CSP/k (Holt et al., 1978), 
and Mesa (Mitchell et al., 1979) also provide monitors. Among contemporary 
languages, monitors are supported by Ada, Java, and C#, all of which are dis-
cussed later in this chapter.

13.4.2  Competition Synchronization

One of the most important features of monitors is that shared data is resident 
in the monitor rather than in any of the client units. The programmer does 
not synchronize mutually exclusive access to shared data through the use of 
semaphores or other mechanisms. Because the access mechanisms are part of 
the monitor, implementation of a monitor can be made to guarantee synchro-
nized access by allowing only one access at a time. Calls to monitor procedures 
are implicitly blocked and stored in a queue if the monitor is busy at the time 
of the call.

13.4.3  Cooperation Synchronization

Although mutually exclusive access to shared data is intrinsic with a monitor, 
cooperation between processes is still the task of the programmer. In particu-
lar, the programmer must guarantee that a shared buffer does not experience 
underf low or overf low. Different languages provide different ways of program-
ming cooperation synchronization, all of which are related to semaphores.

A figure depicting a program containing four tasks and a monitor that pro-
vides synchronized access to a concurrently shared buffer is shown in Figure 13.3. 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   549

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
550 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

Figure 13.3

A program using a 
 monitor to control 
access to a shared 
buffer

Process
SUB1

Process
SUB2

Process
SUB3

Process
SUB4

Program

Insert

Remove

Monitor

B
U
F
F
E
R

In this figure, the interface to the monitor is shown as the two boxes labeled 
insert and remove (for the insertion and removal of data). The monitor appears 
exactly like an abstract data type—a data structure with limited access—which is 
what a monitor is.

13.4.4  Evaluation

Monitors are a better way to provide competition synchronization than are 
semaphores, primarily because of the problems of semaphores, as discussed in 
Section 13.3. The cooperation synchronization is still a problem with monitors, 
as will be clear when Ada and Java implementations of monitors are discussed 
in the following sections.

Semaphores and monitors are equally powerful at expressing concurrency 
control—semaphores can be used to implement monitors and monitors can be 
used to implement semaphores.

Ada provides two ways to implement monitors. Ada 83 includes a general 
tasking model that can be used to support monitors. Ada 95 added a cleaner 
and more efficient way of constructing monitors, called protected objects. Both of 
these approaches use message passing as a basic model for supporting concur-
rency. The message-passing model allows concurrent units to be distributed, 
which monitors do not allow. Message passing is described in Section 13.5; Ada 
support for message passing is discussed in Section 13.6.

In Java, a monitor can be implemented in a class designed as an abstract 
data type, with the shared data being the type. Accesses to objects of the class 
are controlled  by  adding  the  synchronized modifier to the access meth-
ods. An example of a monitor for the shared buffer written in Java is given in   
Section 13.7.4.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   550

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.5  Message Passing 

  551

C# has a predefined class, Monitor, which is designed for implementing 

monitors.

13.5  Message Passing

This section introduces the fundamental concept of message passing in con-
currency. Note that this concept of message passing is unrelated to the message 
passing used in object-oriented programming to enact methods.

13.5.1 

Introduction

The first efforts to design languages that provide the capability for message 
passing among concurrent tasks were those of Brinch Hansen (1978) and Hoare 
(1978). These pioneer developers of message passing also developed a tech-
nique for handling the problem of what to do when multiple simultaneous 
requests were made by other tasks to communicate with a given task. It was 
decided that some form of nondeterminism was required to provide fairness 
in choosing which among those requests would be taken first. This fairness 
can be defined in various ways, but in general, it means that all requesters 
are provided an equal chance of communicating with a given task (assuming 
that every requester has the same priority). Nondeterministic constructs for 
statement-level control, called guarded commands, were introduced by Dijkstra 
(1975). Guarded commands are discussed in Chapter 8. Guarded commands 
are the basis of the construct designed for controlling message passing.

13.5.2  The Concept of Synchronous Message Passing

Message passing can be either synchronous or asynchronous. Here, we describe 
synchronous message passing. The basic concept of synchronous message pass-
ing is that tasks are often busy, and when busy, they cannot be interrupted by 
other units. Suppose task A and task B are both in execution, and A wishes to 
send a message to B. Clearly, if B is busy, it is not desirable to allow another 
task to interrupt it. That would disrupt B’s current processing. Furthermore, 
messages usually cause associated processing in the receiver, which might not 
be sensible if other processing is incomplete. The alternative is to provide a 
linguistic mechanism that allows a task to specify to other tasks when it is ready 
to receive messages. This approach is somewhat like an executive who instructs 
his or her secretary to hold all incoming calls until another activity, perhaps an 
important conversation, is completed. Later, when the current conversation is 
complete, the executive tells the secretary that he or she is now willing to talk 
to one of the callers who has been placed on hold.

A task can be designed so that it can suspend its execution at some point, 
either because it is idle or because it needs information from another unit 
before it can continue. This is like a person who is waiting for an important call. 
In some cases, there is nothing else to do but sit and wait. However, if task A is 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   551

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
552 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

waiting for a message at the time task B sends that message, the message can be 
transmitted. This actual transmission of the message is called a rendezvous. 
Note that a rendezvous can occur only if both the sender and receiver want it 
to happen. During a rendezvous, the information of the message can be trans-
mitted in either or both directions.

Both cooperation and competition synchronization of tasks can be conve-
niently handled with the message-passing model, as described in the following 
section.

13.6  Ada Support for Concurrency

This section describes the support for concurrency provided by Ada. Ada 83 
supports only synchronous message passing.

13.6.1  Fundamentals

The Ada design for tasks is partially based on the work of Brinch Hansen and 
Hoare in that message passing is the design basis and nondeterminism is used 
to choose among the tasks that have sent messages.

The full Ada tasking model is complex, and the following discussion of 
it is limited. The focus here will be on the Ada version of the synchronous 
message-passing mechanism.

Ada tasks can be more active than monitors. Monitors are passive entities 
that provide management services for the shared data they store. They provide 
their services, though only when those services are requested. When used to 
manage shared data, Ada tasks can be thought of as managers that can reside 
with the resource they manage. They have several mechanisms, some determin-
istic and some nondeterministic, that allow them to choose among competing 
requests for access to their resources.

There are two syntactic parts to an Ada task—a specification part and 
a body part—both with the same name. The interface of a task is its entry 
points or locations where it can accept messages from other tasks. Because 
these entry points are part of its interface, it is natural that they be listed in the 
specification part of a task. Because a rendezvous can involve an exchange of 
information, messages can have parameters; therefore, task entry points must 
also allow parameters, which must also be described in the specification part. 
In appearance, a task specification is similar to the package specification for an 
abstract data type.

As an example of an Ada task specification, consider the following code, 
which includes a single entry point named Entry_1, which has an in-mode 
parameter:

task Task_Example is
  entry Entry_1(Item : in Integer);
end Task_Example;

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   552

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.6  Ada Support for Concurrency 

  553

A task body must include some syntactic form of the entry points that 
correspond to the entry clauses in that task’s specification part. In Ada, these 
task  body  entry  points  are  specified  by  clauses  that  are  introduced  by  the 
accept reserved word. An accept clause is defined as the range of statements 
beginning with the accept reserved word and ending with the matching end 
reserved word. accept clauses are themselves relatively simple, but other con-
structs in which they can be embedded can make their semantics complex. A 
simple accept clause has the following form:

accept entry_name (formal parameters) do
  ...
end entry_name;

The accept entry name matches the name in an entry clause in the associated 
task specification part. The optional parameters provide the means of commu-
nicating data between the caller and the called task. The statements between 
the do and the end define the operations that take place during the rendezvous. 
These statements are together called the accept clause body. During the 
actual rendezvous, the sender task is suspended.

Whenever an accept clause receives a message that it is not willing to 
accept,  for  whatever  reason,  the  sender  task  must  be  suspended  until  the 
accept clause in the receiver task is ready to accept the message. Of course, 
the accept clause must also remember the sender tasks that have sent messages 
that were not accepted. For this purpose, each accept clause in a task has a 
queue associated with it that stores a list of other tasks that have unsuccessfully 
attempted to communicate with it.

The following is the skeletal body of the task whose specification was given 

previously:

task body Task_Example is
  begin
  loop
    accept Entry_1(Item : in Integer) do
      ...
    end Entry_1;
  end loop;
  end Task_Example;

The accept clause of this task body is the implementation of the entry 
named Entry_1 in the task specification. If the execution of Task_Example 
begins and reaches the Entry_1 accept clause before any other task sends 
a message to Entry_1, Task_Example is suspended. If another task sends 
a message to Entry_1 while Task_Example is suspended at its accept, a 
rendezvous occurs and the accept clause body is executed. Then, because 
of the loop, execution proceeds back to the accept. If no other task has sent 
a message to  Entry_1, execution is again suspended to wait for the next 
message.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   553

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
554 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

A rendezvous can occur in two basic ways in this simple example. First, the 
receiver task, Task_Example, can be waiting for another task to send a message 
to the Entry_1 entry. When the message is sent, the rendezvous occurs. This 
is the situation described earlier. Second, the receiver task can be busy with one 
rendezvous, or with some other processing not associated with a rendezvous, 
when another task attempts to send a message to the same entry. In that case, 
the sender is suspended until the receiver is free to accept that message in a 
rendezvous. If several messages arrive while the receiver is busy, the senders 
are queued to wait their turn for a rendezvous.

The two rendezvous just described are illustrated with the timeline dia-

grams in Figure 13.4.

Figure 13.4

Two ways a rendezvous 
with Task_Example 
can occur

Task_Example

Accept

Sender

Task_Example

Sender

Task_Example

Accept

Task_Example

Tasks  need  not  have  entry  points.  Such  tasks  are  called  actor  tasks 
because they do not wait for a rendezvous in order to do their work. Actor 
tasks can rendezvous with other tasks by sending them messages. In contrast 
to actor tasks, a task can have accept clauses but not have any code outside 
those accept clauses, so it can only react to other tasks. Such a task is called 
a server task.

An Ada task that sends a message to another task must know the entry 
name in that task. However, the opposite is not true: A task entry need not 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   554

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.6  Ada Support for Concurrency 

  555

know the name of the task from which it will accept messages. This asymmetry 
is in contrast to the design of the language known as CSP, or Communicat-
ing Sequential Processes (Hoare, 1978). In CSP, which also uses the message- 
passing model of concurrency, tasks accept messages only from explicitly named 
tasks. The disadvantage of this is that libraries of tasks cannot be built for 
general use.

The usual graphical method of describing a rendezvous in which task A 

sends a message to task B is shown in Figure 13.5.

accept

Figure 13.5

Graphical 
 representation of a 
rendezvous caused by a 
message sent from task 
A to task B

(value)

accept

Tasks are declared in the declaration part of a package, subprogram, or 
block. Statically created tasks2 begin executing at the same time as the state-
ments in the code to which that declarative part is attached. For example, a task 
declared  in  a  main  program  begins  execution  at  the  same  time  as  the  first 
statement in the code body of the main program. Task termination, which is a 
complex issue, is discussed later in this section.

Tasks may have any number of entries. The order in which the associated 
accept clauses appear in the task dictates the order in which messages can be 
accepted. If a task has more than one entry point and requires them to be able 
to receive messages in any order, the task uses a select statement to enclose 
the entries. For example, suppose a task models the activities of a bank teller, 
who must serve customers at a walk-up station inside the bank and also serve 

2.  Tasks can also be dynamically created, but such tasks are not covered here.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   555

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
556 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

customers at a drive-up window. The following skeletal teller task illustrates a 
select construct:

task body Teller is
begin
  loop
    select
      accept Drive_Up(formal parameters) do
        ...
      end Drive_Up;
      ...
    or
      accept Walk_Up(formal parameters) do
        ...
      end Walk_Up;
      ...
    end select;
  end loop;
end Teller;

In this task, there are two accept clauses, Walk_Up and Drive_Up, each of 
which has an associated queue. The action of the select, when it is executed, 
is to examine the queues associated with the two accept clauses. If one of 
the queues is empty, but the other contains at least one waiting message (cus-
tomer), the accept clause associated with the waiting message or messages 
has a rendezvous with the task that sent the first message that was received. 
If both accept clauses have empty queues, the select waits until one of 
the  entries  is  called.  If  both  accept  clauses  have  nonempty  queues,  one 
of the accept clauses is nondeterministically chosen to have a rendezvous 
with one of its callers. The loop forces the select statement to be executed 
repeatedly, forever.

The end of the accept clause marks the end of the code that assigns or 
references the formal parameters of the accept clause. The code, if there is 
any, between an accept clause and the next or (or the end select, if the 
accept clause is the last one in the select) is called the extended accept 
clause.  The  extended  accept  clause  is  executed  only  after  the  associated 
(immediately preceding)  accept clause is executed. This execution of the 
extended  accept  clause  is  not  part  of  the  rendezvous  and  can  take  place 
concurrently with the execution of the calling task. The sender is suspended 
during the rendezvous, but it is put back in the ready queue when the end of 
the accept clause is reached. If an accept clause has no formal parameters, 
the do-end is not required, and the accept clause can consist entirely of an 
extended accept clause. Such an accept clause would be used exclusively for 
synchronization. Extended accept clauses are illustrated in the Buf_Task 
task in Section 13.6.3.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   556

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.6  Ada Support for Concurrency 

  557

13.6.2  Cooperation Synchronization

Each accept clause can have a guard attached, in the form of a when clause, 
that can delay rendezvous. For example,

when not Full(Buffer) =>
  accept Deposit(New_Value) do
    ...
  end 

An accept clause with a when clause is either open or closed. If the Boolean 
expression of the when clause is currently true, that accept clause is called 
open; if the Boolean expression is false, the accept clause is called closed. 
An accept clause that does not have a guard is always open. An open accept 
clause is available for rendezvous; a closed accept clause cannot rendezvous.

Suppose there are several guarded  accept clauses in a select clause. 
Such a select clause is usually placed in an infinite loop. The loop causes 
the select clause to be executed repeatedly, with each when clause evaluated 
on each repetition. Each repetition causes a list of open accept clauses to be 
constructed. If exactly one of the open clauses has a nonempty queue, a mes-
sage from that queue is taken and a rendezvous takes place. If more than one 
of the open accept clauses has nonempty queues, one queue is chosen non-
deterministically, a message is taken from that queue, and a rendezvous takes 
place. If the queues of all open clauses are empty, the task waits for a message 
to arrive at one of those accept clauses, at which time a rendezvous will occur. 
If a select is executed and every accept clause is closed, a run-time exception 
or error results. This possibility can be avoided either by making sure one of 
the when clauses is always true or by adding an else clause in the select. An 
else clause can include any sequence of statements, except an accept clause.
A select clause may have a special statement, terminate, that is selected 
only when it is open and no other accept clause is open. A terminate clause, 
when selected, means that the task is finished with its job but is not yet termi-
nated. Task termination is discussed later in this section.

13.6.3  Competition Synchronization

The features described so far provide for cooperation synchronization and 
communication among tasks. Next, we discuss how mutually exclusive access 
to shared data structures can be enforced in Ada.

If access to a data structure is to be controlled by a task, then mutually 
exclusive access can be achieved by declaring the data structure within a task. 
The semantics of task execution usually guarantees mutually exclusive access to 
the structure, because only one accept clause in the task can be active at a given 
time. The only exceptions to this occur when tasks are nested in procedures 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   557

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
558 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

or other tasks. For example, if a task that defines a shared data structure has a 
nested task, that nested task can also access the shared structure, which could 
destroy the integrity of the data. Thus, tasks that are meant to control access 
to a shared data structure should not define tasks.

The following is an example of an Ada task that implements a monitor for 
a buffer. The buffer behaves very much like the buffer in Section 13.3, in which 
synchronization is controlled with semaphores.

task Buf_Task is
   entry Deposit(Item : in Integer);
   entry Fetch(Item : out Integer);
end Buf_Task;

task body Buf_Task is
  Bufsize : constant Integer := 100;
  Buf   :  array (1..Bufsize) of Integer;
  Filled : Integer range 0..Bufsize := 0;
  Next_In,
  Next_Out : Integer range 1..Bufsize := 1;
begin
  loop
    select
      when Filled < Bufsize =>
         accept Deposit(Item : in Integer) do
           Buf(Next_In) := Item;
         end Deposit;
        Next_In := (Next_In mod Bufsize) + 1;
        Filled := Filled + 1;
    or
      when Filled > 0 =>
        accept Fetch(Item : out Integer) do
          Item := Buf(Next_Out);
        end Fetch;
        Next_Out := (Next_Out mod Bufsize) + 1;
        Filled := Filled - 1;
    end select;
   end loop;
end Buf_Task;

In this example, both accept clauses are extended. These extended clauses 
can be executed concurrently with the tasks that called the associated accept 
clauses.

The tasks for a producer and a consumer that could use Buf_Task have 

the following form:

task Producer;
task Consumer;
task body Producer is
  New_Value : Integer;
begin

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   558

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.6  Ada Support for Concurrency 

  559

  loop
    -- produce New_Value --
    Buf_Task.Deposit(New_Value);
  end loop;
end Producer;

task body Consumer is
  Stored_Value : Integer;
begin
  loop
    Buf_Task.Fetch(Stored_Value);
    -- consume Stored_Value --
  end loop;
end Consumer;

13.6.4  Protected Objects

As we have seen, access to shared data can be controlled by enclosing the data 
in a task and allowing access only through task entries, which implicitly pro-
vide competition synchronization. One problem with this method is that it is 
difficult to implement the rendezvous mechanism efficiently. Ada 95 protected 
objects provide an alternative method of providing competition synchroniza-
tion that need not involve the rendezvous mechanism.

A protected object is not a task; it is more like a monitor, as described in 
Section 13.4. Protected objects can be accessed either by protected subpro-
grams or by entries that are syntactically similar to the accept clauses in tasks.3 
The protected subprograms can be either protected procedures, which provide 
mutually exclusive read-write access to the data of the protected object, or 
protected functions, which provide concurrent read-only access to that data. 
Entries differ from protected subprograms in that they can have guards.

Within the body of a protected procedure, the current instance of the 
enclosing protected unit is defined to be a variable; within the body of a pro-
tected function, the current instance of the enclosing protected unit is defined 
to be a constant, which allows concurrent read-only access.

Entry calls to a protected object provide synchronous communication with 
one or more tasks using the same protected object. These entry calls provide 
access similar to that provided to the data enclosed in a task.

The buffer problem that is solved with a task in the previous subsection 
can be more simply solved with a protected object. Note that this example does 
not include protected subprograms.

protected Buffer is
  entry Deposit(Item : in Integer);
  entry Fetch(Item : out Integer);

3.  Entries in protected object bodies use the reserved word entry, rather than the accept 

used in task bodies.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   559

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
560 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

private
  Bufsize : constant Integer := 100;
  Buf   : array  (1..Bufsize) of Integer;
  Filled : Integer range 0..Bufsize := 0;
  Next_In,
  Next_Out : Integer range 1..Bufsize := 1;
  end Buffer;

protected body Buffer is
  entry Deposit(Item : in Integer)
     when Filled < Bufsize is
    begin
    Buf(Next_In) := Item;
    Next_In := (Next_In mod Bufsize) + 1;
    Filled := Filled + 1;
    end Deposit;
  entry Fetch(Item : out Integer) when Filled > 0 is
    begin Item := Buf(Next_Out);
    Next_Out := (Next_Out mod Bufsize) + 1;
    Filled := Filled - 1;
    end Fetch;
end Buffer;

13.6.5  Evaluation

Using the general message-passing model of concurrency to construct moni-
tors is like using Ada packages to support abstract data types—both are tools 
that are more general than is necessary. Protected objects are a better way to 
provide synchronized access to shared data.

In the absence of distributed processors with independent memories, the 
choice between monitors and tasks with message passing as a means of imple-
menting synchronized access to shared data in a concurrent environment is 
somewhat a matter of taste. However, in the case of Ada, protected objects are 
clearly better than tasks for supporting concurrent access to shared data. Not 
only is the code simpler; it is also much more efficient.

For distributed systems, message passing is a better model for concurrency, 
because it naturally supports the concept of separate processes executing in 
parallel on separate processors.

13.7  Java Threads

The concurrent units in Java are methods named  run,  whose code can be 
in concurrent execution with other such methods (of other objects) and with 
the main method. The process in which the run methods execute is called a 
thread. Java’s threads are lightweight tasks, which means that they all run in 
the same address space. This is different from Ada tasks, which are heavyweight 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   560

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.7  Java Threads 

  561

threads (they run in their own address spaces).4 One important result of this 
difference is that threads require far less overhead than Ada’s tasks.

There are two ways to define a class with a run method. One of these is to 
define a subclass of the predefined class Thread and override its run method. 
However, if the new subclass has a necessary natural parent, then defining it as a 
subclass of Thread obviously will not work. In these situations, we define a sub-
class that inherits from its natural parent and implements the  Runnable inter-
face. Runnable provides the run method protocol, so any class that implements 
Runnable must define run. An object of the class that implements  Runnable 
is passed to the Thread constructor. So, this approach still requires a Thread 
object, as will be seen in the example in Section 13.7.5.

In Ada, tasks can be either actors or servers and tasks communicate with 
each other through accept clauses. Java run methods are all actors and there 
is no mechanism for them to communicate with each other, except for the join 
method (see Section 13.7.1) and through shared data.

Java threads is a complex topic—this section only provides an introduction 

to its simplest but most useful parts.

13.7.1  The Thread Class

The Thread class is not the natural parent of any other classes. It provides some 
services for its subclasses, but it is not related in any natural way to their com-
putational purposes. Thread is the only class available for creating concurrent 
Java programs. As previously stated, Section 13.7.5 will brief ly discuss the use 
of the Runnable interface.

The Thread class includes five constructors and a collection of methods 
and constants. The run method, which describes the actions of the thread, is 
always overridden by subclasses of Thread. The start method of Thread 
starts its thread as a concurrent unit by calling its run method.5 The call to 
start is unusual in that control returns immediately to the caller, which then 
continues its execution, in parallel with the newly started run method.

Following is a skeletal subclass of Thread and a code fragment that creates 
an object of the subclass and starts the run method’s execution in the new thread:

class MyThread extends Thread {
  public void run() { . . . }
}
. . .
Thread myTh = new MyThread();
myTh.start();

4.  Actually, although Ada tasks behave as if they were heavyweight tasks, in some cases, they are 
now implemented as threads. This is sometimes done using libraries, such as the IBM Ratio-
nal Apex Native POSIX Threading Library.

5.  Calling the run method directly does not always work, because initialization that is 

 sometimes required is included in the start method.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   561

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
 
562 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

When a Java application program begins execution, a new thread is created 
(in which the main method will run) and main is called. Therefore, all Java 
application programs run in threads.

When a program has multiple threads, a scheduler must determine which 
thread or threads will run at any given time. In many cases, there is only a single 
processor available, so only one thread actually runs at a time. It is difficult to 
give a precise description of how the Java scheduler works, because the different 
implementations (Solaris, Windows, and so on) do not necessarily schedule 
threads in exactly the same way. Typically, however, the scheduler gives equal-
size time slices to each ready thread in round-robin fashion, assuming all of 
these threads have the same priority. Section 13.7.2 describes how different 
priorities can be given to different threads.

The Thread class provides several methods for controlling the execution 
of threads. The yield method, which takes no parameters, is a request from 
the running thread to surrender the processor voluntarily.6 The thread is put 
immediately in the task-ready queue, making it ready to run. The scheduler 
then chooses the highest-priority thread from the task-ready queue. If there 
are no other ready threads with priority higher than the one that just yielded 
the processor, it may also be the next thread to get the processor.

The sleep method has a single parameter, which is the integer number 
of milliseconds that the caller of sleep wants the thread to be blocked. After 
the specified number of milliseconds has passed, the thread will be put in the 
task-ready queue. Because there is no way to know how long a thread will be 
in the task-ready queue before it runs, the parameter to sleep is the minimum 
amount of time the thread will not be in execution. The sleep method can 
throw an InterruptedException, which must be handled in the method that 
calls sleep. Exceptions are described in detail in Chapter 14.

The join method is used to force a method to delay its execution until the 
run method of another thread has completed its execution. join is used when 
the processing of a method cannot continue until the work of the other thread 
is complete. For example, we might have the following run method:

public void run() {
  . . .
  Thread myTh = new Thread();
  myTh.start();
  // do part of the computation of this thread
  myTh.join();  // Wait for myTh to complete
  // do the rest of the computation of this thread
}

The join method puts the thread that calls it in the blocked state, which can be 
ended only by the completion of the thread on which join was called. If that 
thread happens to be blocked, there is the possibility of deadlock. To prevent 

6.  The yield method is actually defined to be a “suggestion” to the scheduler, which it may 

or may not follow (though it usually does).

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   562

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
 
13.7  Java Threads 

  563

this, join can be called with a parameter, which is the time limit in milliseconds 
of how long the calling thread will wait for the called thread to complete. For 
example, the following call to join will cause the calling thread to wait two 
seconds for myTh to complete. If it has not completed its execution after two 
seconds have passed, the calling thread is put back in the ready queue, which 
means that it will continue its execution as soon as it is scheduled.

myTh.join(2000);

Early versions of Java included three more Thread methods: stop, sus-
pend, and resume. All three of these have been deprecated because of safety 
problems. The stop method is sometimes overridden with a simple method 
that destroys the thread by setting its reference variable to null.

The normal way a run method ends its execution is by reaching the end of 
its code. However, in many cases, threads run until told to terminate. Regard-
ing this, there is the question of how a thread can determine whether it should 
continue or end. The interrupt method is one way to communicate to a 
thread that it should stop. This method does not stop the thread; rather, it 
sends the thread a message that actually just sets a bit in the thread object, 
which can be checked by the thread. The bit is checked with the predicate 
method, isInterrupted. This is not a complete solution, because the thread 
one  is  attempting  to  interrupt  may  be  sleeping  or  waiting  at  the  time  the 
interrupt method is called, which means that it will not be checking to see 
if it has been interrupted. For these situations, the  interrupt method also 
throws an exception, InterruptedException, which also causes the thread 
to awaken (from sleeping or waiting). So, a thread can periodically check to 
see whether it has been interrupted and if so, whether it can terminate. The 
thread cannot miss the interrupt, because if it was asleep or waiting when the 
interrupt occurred, it will be awakened by the interrupt. Actually, there are 
more details to the actions and uses of interrupt, but they are not covered 
here (Arnold et al., 2006).

13.7.2  Priorities

The priorities of threads need not all be the same. A thread’s default priority 
initially is the same as the thread that created it. If main creates a thread, its 
default priority is the constant NORM_PRIORITY, which is usually 5. Thread 
defines  two  other  priority  constants,  MAX_PRIORITY  and  MIN_PRIORITY, 
whose values are usually 10 and 1, respectively.7 The priority of a thread can 
be changed with the method setPriority. The new priority can be any of the 
predefined constants or any other number between MIN_PRIORITY and MAX_
PRIORITY. The getPriority method returns the current priority of a thread. 
The priority constants are defined in Thread.

7.  The number of priorities is implementation dependent, so there may be fewer or more than 

10 levels in some implementations.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   563

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
564 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

When there are threads with different priorities, the scheduler’s behav-
ior is controlled by those priorities. When the executing thread is blocked or 
killed or the time slice for it expires, the scheduler chooses the thread from 
the task-ready queue that has the highest priority. A thread with lower priority 
will run only if one of higher priority is not in the task-ready queue when the 
opportunity arises.

13.7.3  Semaphores

The java.util.concurrent.Semaphore package defines the Semaphore 
class.  Objects  of  this  class  implement  counting  semaphores.  A  counting 
semaphore has a counter, but no queue for storing thread descriptors. The 
 Semaphore class defines two methods, acquire and release, which corre-
spond to the wait and release operations described in Section 13.3.

The basic constructor for Semaphore takes one integer parameter, which 
initializes the semaphore’s counter. For example, the following could be used to 
initialize the fullspots and emptyspots semaphores for the buffer example 
of Section 13.3.2:

fullspots = new Semaphore(0);
emptyspots = new Semaphore(BUFLEN);

The deposit operation of the producer method would appear as follows:

emptyspots.acquire();
deposit(value);
fullspots.release();

Likewise, the fetch operation of the consumer method would appear as follows:

fullspots.acquire();
fetch(value);
emptyspots.release();

The deposit and fetch methods could use the approach used in  Section 
13.7.4 to provide the competition synchronization required for the accesses 
to the buffer.

13.7.4  Competition Synchronization

Java methods (but not constructors) can be specified to be synchronized. A 
synchronized method called through a specific object must complete its exe-
cution before any other synchronized method can run on that object. Com-
petition synchronization on an object is implemented by specifying that the 
methods that access shared data are synchronized. The synchronized mech-
anism is implemented as follows: Every Java object has a lock. Synchronized 
methods must acquire the lock of the object before they are allowed to exe-
cute, which prevents other synchronized methods from executing on the object 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   564

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.7  Java Threads 

  565

during that time. A synchronized method releases the lock on the object on 
which it runs when it completes its execution, even if that completion is due to 
an exception. Consider the following skeletal class definition:

class ManageBuf {
  private int [100] buf;
  . . .
  public synchronized void deposit(int item) { . . . }
  public synchronized int fetch() { . . . }
  . . .
}

The two methods defined in ManageBuf are both defined to be synchro-
nized, which prevents them from interfering with each other while executing 
on the same object, when they are called by separate threads.

An object whose methods are all synchronized is effectively a monitor. 
Note that an object may have one or more synchronized methods, as well as 
one or more unsynchronized methods. An unsynchronized method can run 
on an object at anytime, even during the execution of a synchronized method.
In some cases, the number of statements that deal with the shared data 
structure is significantly less than the number of other statements in the method 
in which it resides. In these cases, it is better to synchronize the code segment 
that changes the shared data structure rather than the whole method. This can 
be done with a so-called synchronized statement, whose general form is as follows:

synchronized (expression){
 statements
}

The expression in this code must evaluate to an object and the statement can 
be a single statement or a compound statement. The object is locked during 
execution of the statement or compound statement, so the statement or com-
pound statement is executed exactly as if it were the body of a synchronized 
method.

An object that has synchronized methods defined for it must have a queue 
associated with it that stores the synchronized methods that have attempted 
to execute on it while it was being operated upon by another synchronized 
method.  Actually,  every  object  has  a  queue  called  the intrinsic  condition 
queue. These queues are implicitly supplied. When a synchronized method 
completes its execution on an object, a method that is waiting in the object’s 
intrinsic condition queue, if there is such a method, is put in the task-ready 
queue.

13.7.5  Cooperation Synchronization

Cooperation synchronization in Java is implemented with the wait, notify, 
and notifyAll methods, all of which are defined in Object, the root class of 
all Java classes. All classes except Object inherit these methods. Every object 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   565

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
566 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

has a wait list of all of the threads that have called wait on the object. The 
notify method is called to tell one waiting thread that an event that it may 
have been waiting for has occurred. The specific thread that is awakened by 
notify cannot be determined, because the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) chooses 
one from the wait list of the thread object at random. Because of this, along 
with the fact that the waiting threads may be waiting for different conditions, 
the notifyAll method is often used, rather than notify. The notifyAll 
method awakens all of the threads on the object’s wait list by putting them in 
the task-ready queue.

The methods  wait,  notify, and  notifyAll can be called only from 
within a synchronized method, because they use the lock placed on an object 
by such a method. The call to wait is always put in a while loop that is con-
trolled by the condition for which the method is waiting. The while loop is 
necessary because the notify or notifyAll that awakened the thread may 
have been called because of a change in a condition other than the one for 
which the thread was waiting. If it was a call to notifyAll, there is even a 
smaller chance that the condition being waited for is now true. Because of the 
use of notifyAll, some other thread may have changed the condition to false 
since it was last tested.

The wait method can throw InterruptedException, which is a descen-
dant  of  Exception.  Java’s  exception  handling  is  discussed  in  Chapter  14. 
Therefore, any code that calls wait must also catch InterruptedException. 
Assuming the condition being waited for is called theCondition, the conven-
tional way to use wait is as follows:

try  {
  while (!theCondition)
    wait();
  -- Do whatever is needed after theCondition comes true
}
catch(InterruptedException myProblem) { . . . }

The following program implements a circular queue for storing int values. 

It illustrates both cooperation and competition synchronization.

// Queue
// This class implements a circular queue for storing int
// values. It includes a constructor for allocating and
// initializing the queue to a specified size. It has
// synchronized methods for inserting values into and
// removing values from the queue.

class Queue {
  private int [] que;
  private int nextIn,
              nextOut,
              filled,
              queSize;

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   566

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.7  Java Threads 

  567

  public Queue(int size) {
    que = new int [size];
    filled = 0;
    nextIn = 1;
    nextOut = 1;
    queSize = size;
  }  //** end of Queue constructor

  public synchronized void deposit (int item)
         throws InterruptedException {
    try {
      while (filled == queSize)
        wait();
      que [nextIn] = item;
      nextIn = (nextIn % queSize) + 1;
      filled++;
      notifyAll();
    }  //** end of try clause
    catch(InterruptedException e) {}
  }  //** end of deposit method

  public synchronized int fetch()
      throws InterruptedException {
    int item = 0;
    try {
      while (filled == 0)
        wait();
      item = que [nextOut];
      nextOut = (nextOut % queSize) + 1;
      filled--;
      notifyAll();
    }  //** end of try clause
    catch(InterruptedException e) {}
    return item;
  }  //** end of fetch method
}  //** end of Queue class

Notice that the exception handler (catch) does nothing here.

Classes to define producer and consumer objects that could use the Queue 

class can be defined as follows:

class Producer extends Thread {
  private Queue buffer;
  public Producer(Queue que) {
    buffer = que;
  }
  public void run() {
     int new_item;
     while  (true) {
      //-- Create a new_item

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   567

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
568 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

      buffer.deposit(new_item);
    }
  }
}

class Consumer extends Thread {
  private Queue buffer;
  public Consumer(Queue que) {
    buffer = que;
  }
  public void run() {
    int stored_item;
    while (true) {
      stored_item = buffer.fetch();
      //-- Consume the stored_item
    }
  }
}

The  following  code  creates  a  Queue  object,  and  a  Producer  and 
a   Consumer  object,  both  attached  to  the  Queue  object,  and  starts  their 
execution:

Queue buff1 = new Queue(100);
Producer producer1 = new Producer(buff1);
Consumer consumer1 = new Consumer(buff1);
producer1.start();
consumer1.start();

We  could  define  one  or  both  of  the  Producer  and  the  Consumer  as 
 implementations  of  the  Runnable  interface  rather  than  as  subclasses  of 
Thread. The only difference is in the first line, which would now appear as 
follows:

class Producer implements Runnable { . . . }

To create and run an object of such a class, it is still necessary to create a 
Thread object that is connected to the object. This is illustrated in the follow-
ing code:

Producer producer1 = new Producer(buff1);
Thread producerThread = new Thread(producer1);
producerThread.start();

Note that the buffer object is passed to the Producer constructor and the 
Producer object is passed to the Thread constructor.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   568

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.7.6  Nonblocking Synchronization

13.7  Java Threads 

  569

Java includes some classes for controlling accesses to certain variables that 
do not include blocking or waiting. The java.util.concurrent.atomic 
package defines classes that allow certain nonblocking synchronized access to 
int, long, and boolean primitive type variables, as well as references and 
arrays. For example, the AtomicInteger class defines getter and setter meth-
ods, as well as methods for add, increment, and decrement operations. These 
operations are all atomic; that is, they cannot be interrupted, so locks are not 
required to guarantee the integrity of the values of the affected variables in 
a multithreaded program. This is fine-grained synchronization—just a single 
variable. Most machines now have atomic instructions for these operations on 
int and long types, so they are often easy to implement (implicit locks are not 
required).

The  advantage  of  nonblocking  synchronization  is  efficiency.  A  non-
blocking access that does not occur during contention will be no slower, 
and usually faster than one that uses synchronized. A nonblocking access 
that occurs during contention definitely will be faster than one that uses 
synchronized, because the latter will require suspension and rescheduling 
of threads.

13.7.7  Explicit Locks

Java 5.0 introduced explicit locks as an alternative to synchronized method 
and blocks, which provide implicit locks. The Lock interface declares the lock, 
unlock, and tryLock methods. The predefined ReentrantLock class imple-
ments the Lock interface. To lock a block of code, the following idiom can be 
used:

Lock lock = new ReentrantLock();
. . .
Lock.lock();
try {
   // The code that accesses the shared data
} finally  {
  Lock.unlock();
}

This skeletal code creates a Lock object and calls the lock method on the 
Lock object. Then, it uses a try block to enclose the critical code. The call to 
unlock is in a finally clause to guarantee the lock is released, regardless of 
what happens in the try block.

There are at least two situations in which explicit locks are used rather 
than implicit locks: First, if the application needs to try to acquire a lock but 
cannot wait forever for it, the Lock interface includes a method, tryLock, that 
takes a time limit parameter. If the lock is not acquired within the time limit, 
execution continues at the statement following the call to tryLock. Second, 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   569

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
570 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

explicit locks are used when it is not convenient to have the lock-unlock pairs 
block structured. Implicit locks are always unlocked at the end of the compound 
statement in which they are locked. Explicit locks can be unlocked anywhere 
in the code, regardless of the structure of the program.

One danger of using explicit locks (and is not the case with using implicit 
locks) is that of omitting the unlock. Implicit locks are implicitly unlocked at 
the end of the locked block. However, explicit locks stay locked until explicitly 
unlocked, which can potentially be never.

As stated previously, each object has an intrinsic condition queue, which 
stores threads waiting for a condition on the object. The wait, notify, and 
notifyAll methods are the API for an intrinsic condition queue. Because 
each object can have just one condition queue, a queue may have threads in it 
waiting for different conditions. For example, the queue for our buffer exam-
ple Queue can have threads waiting for either of two conditions (filled == 
queSize or filled == 0). That is the reason why the buffer uses notifyAll. 
(If it used notify, only one thread would be awakened, and it might be one 
that was waiting for a different condition than the one that actually became 
true.) However, notifyAll is expensive to use, because it awakens all threads 
waiting on an object and all must check their condition to determine which 
one runs. Furthermore, to check their condition, they must first acquire the 
lock on the object.

An alternative to using the intrinsic condition queue is the  Condition 
interface, which uses a condition queue associated with a Lock object. It also 
declares alternatives to wait, notify, and notifyAll named await, signal, 
and signalAll. There can be any number of Condition objects with one 
Lock object. With Condition, signal, rather than signalAll, can be used, 
which is both easier to understand and more efficient, in part because it results 
in fewer context switches.

13.7.8  Evaluation

Java’s support for concurrency is relatively simple but effective. All Java run 
methods are actor tasks and there is no mechanism for communication, except 
through shared data, as there is among Ada tasks. Because they are heavyweight 
threads, Ada’s tasks easily can be distributed to different processors; in partic-
ular, different processors with different memories, which could be on different 
computers in different places. These kinds of systems are not possible with 
Java’s threads.

13.8  C# Threads

Although C#’s threads are loosely based on those of Java, there are significant 
differences. Following is a brief overview of C#’s threads.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   570

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.8.1  Basic Thread Operations

13.8  C# Threads 

  571

Rather than just methods named run, as in Java, any C# method can run in its 
own thread. When C# threads are created, they are associated with an instance 
of a predefined delegate, ThreadStart. When execution of a thread is started, 
its delegate has the address of the method it is supposed to run. So, execution 
of a thread is controlled through its associated delegate.

A C# thread is created by creating a Thread object. The Thread construc-
tor must be sent an instantiation of ThreadStart, to which must be sent the 
name of the method that is to run in the thread. For example, we might have

public void MyRun1() { . . . }
. . .
Thread myThread = new Thread(new ThreadStart(MyRun1));

In this example, we create a thread named myThread, whose delegate points to 
the method MyRun1. So, when the thread begins execution it calls the method 
whose address is in its delegate. In this example, myThread is the delegate and 
MyRun1 is the method.

Unlike  Java,  in  which  all  threads  are  actors,  C#  has  two  categories  of 
threads: actors and servers. Actor threads are not called specifically; rather, 
they are started. Also, the methods that they execute do not take parameters 
or return values. As with Java, creating a thread does not start its concurrent 
execution. For actor threads, execution must be requested through a method 
of the Thread class, in this case named Start, as in

myThread.Start();

As in Java, a thread can be made to wait for another thread to finish its 
execution before continuing, using the similarly named method Join. For 
example, suppose thread A has the following call:

B.Join();

Thread A will be blocked until thread B exits.

The Join method can take an int parameter, which specifies a time limit 

in milliseconds that the caller will wait for the thread to finish.

A thread can be suspended for a specified amount of time with Sleep, 
which is a public static method of Thread. The parameter to Sleep is an inte-
ger number of milliseconds. Unlike its Java relative, C#’s Sleep does not raise 
any exceptions, so it need not be called in a try block.

A thread can be terminated with the Abort method, although it does not 
literally kill the thread. Instead, it throws ThreadAbortException, which 
the thread can catch. When the thread catches this exception, it usually deal-
locates any resources it allocated, and then ends (by getting to the end of its 
code).

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   571

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
572 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

A server thread runs only when called through its delegate. These threads 
are called servers because they provide some service when it is requested. Server 
threads are more interesting than actor threads because they usually interact with 
other threads and often must have their execution synchronized with other threads.
Recall  from  Chapter  9,  that  any  C#  method  can  be  called  indirectly 
through a delegate. Such calls can be made by treating the delegate object as if 
it were the name of the method. This was actually an abbreviation for a call to a 
delegate method named Invoke. So, if a delegate object’s name is chgfun1 and 
the method it references takes one int parameter, we could call that method 
with either of the following statements:

chgfun1(7);
chgfun1.Invoke(7);

These calls are synchronous; that is, when the method is called, the caller is 
blocked until the method completes its execution. C# also supports asynchro-
nous calls to methods that execute in threads. When a thread is called asynchro-
nously, the called thread and the caller thread execute concurrently, because the 
caller is not blocked during the execution of the called thread.

A thread is called asynchronously through the delegate instance method 
BeginInvoke, to which are sent the parameters for the method of the dele-
gate, along with two additional parameters, one of type AsyncCallback and 
the other of type object. BeginInvoke returns an object that implements 
the IAsyncResult interface. The delegate class also defines the  EndInvoke 
instance  method,  which  takes  one  parameter  of  type  IAsyncResult  and 
returns the same type that is returned by the method encapsulated in the del-
egate object. To call a thread asynchronously, we call it with BeginInvoke. 
For now, we will use null for the last two parameters. Suppose we have the 
following method declaration and thread definition:

public float MyMethod1(int  x);
. . .
Thread myThread = new Thread(new ThreadStart(MyMethod1));

The following statement calls MyMethod asynchronously:

IAsyncResult result = myThread.BeginInvoke(10, null, null);

The return value of the called thread is fetched with EndInvoke method, 
which takes as its parameter the object (of type IAsyncResult) returned by 
BeginInvoke. EndInvoke returns the return value of the called thread. For 
example, to get the float result of the call to MyMethod, we would use the 
following statement:

float  returnValue = EndInvoke(result);

If the caller must continue some work while the called thread executes, 
it must have a way to determine when the called thread is finished. For this, 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   572

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.8  C# Threads 

  573

the IAsyncResult interface defines the IsCompleted property. While the 
called thread is executing, the caller can include code it can execute in a 
while loop that depends on IsCompleted. For example, we could have the 
following:

IAsyncResult result = myThread.BeginInvoke(10, null, null);
while(!result.IsCompleted) {
  // Do some computation
}

This is an effective way to accomplish something in the calling thread while 
waiting for the called thread to complete its work. However, if the amount of 
computation in the while loop is relatively small, this is an inefficient way to 
use that time (because of the time required to test IsCompleted). An alterna-
tive is to give the called thread a delegate with the address of a callback method 
and have it call that method when it is finished. The delegate is sent as the 
second last parameter to BeginInvoke. For example, consider the following 
call to BeginInvoke:

IAsyncResult result = myThread.BeginInvoke(10,
              new AsyncCallback(MyMethodComplete), null);

The callback method is defined in the caller. Such methods often simply set 
a Boolean variable, for example named isDone, to true. No matter how long 
the called thread takes, the callback method is called only once.

13.8.2  Synchronizing Threads

There  are  three  different  ways  that  C#  threads  can  be  synchronized:  the 
Interlocked class, the Monitor class from the System.Threading name-
space, and the lock statement. Each of these mechanisms is designed for a 
specific need. The Interlocked class is used when the only operations that 
need to be synchronized are the incrementing and decrementing of an integer. 
These operations are done atomically with the two methods of Interlocked, 
Increment and Decrement, both of which take a reference to an integer as 
the parameter. For example, to increment a shared integer named counter in 
a thread, we could use

Interlocked.Increment(ref  counter);

The lock statement is used to mark a critical section of code in a thread. 

The syntax of this is as follows:

lock(token) {
   // The critical section
}

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   573

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
574 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

If the code to be synchronized is in a private instance method, the token is the 
current object, so this is used as the token for lock. If the code to be syn-
chronized is in a public instance method, a new instance of object is created 
(in the class of the method with the code to be synchronized) and a reference 
to it is used as the token for lock.

The Monitor class defines five methods, Enter, Wait, Pulse, PulseAll, 
and Exit, which can be used to provide more control of the synchronization of 
threads. The Enter method, which takes an object reference as its parameter, 
marks the beginning of synchronization of the thread on that object. The Wait 
method suspends execution of the thread and instructs the Common Language 
Runtime (CLR) of .NET that this thread wants to resume its execution the next 
time there is an opportunity. The Pulse method, which also takes an object 
reference as its parameter, notifies one waiting thread that it now has a chance 
to run again. PulseAll is similar to Java’s notifyAll. Threads that have been 
waiting are run in the order in which they called the Wait method. The Exit 
method ends the critical section of the thread.

The lock statement is compiled into a monitor, so lock is shorthand for 
a monitor. A monitor is used when the additional control (for example, with 
Wait and PulseAll) is needed.

.NET 4.0 added a collection of generic concurrent data structures, includ-
ing structures for queues, stacks, and bags.8 These new classes are thread safe, 
meaning that they can be used in a multithreaded program without requiring 
the programmer to worry about competition synchronization. The System.
Collections.Concurrent namespace defines these classes, whose names are 
ConcurrentQueue<T>, ConcurrentStack<T>, and ConcurrentBag<T>. So, 
our producer-consumer queue program could be written in C# using a Concur-
rentQueue<T> for the data structure and there would be no need to program 
the competition synchronization for it. Because these concurrent collections are 
defined in .NET, they are also available in all of the other .NET languages.

13.8.3  Evaluation

C#’s threads are a slight improvement over those of its predecessor, Java. For 
one thing, any method can be run in its own thread. Recall that in Java, only 
methods named run can run in their own threads. Java supports actor threads 
only, but C# supports both actor and server threads. Thread termination is 
also cleaner with C# (calling a method (Abort) is more elegant than setting 
the thread’s pointer to null). Synchronization of thread execution is more 
sophisticated in C#, because C# has several different mechanisms, each for a 
specific application. Java’s Lock variables are similar to the locks of C#, except 
that in Java, a lock must be explicitly unlocked with a call to unlock. This 
provides one more way to create erroneous code. C# threads, like those of 
Java, are lightweight, so although they are more efficient, they cannot be as 

8.  Bags are unordered collections of objects.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   574

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
 
13.9  Concurrency in Functional Languages 

  575

versatile as Ada’s tasks. The availability of the concurrent collection classes is 
another advantage C# has over the other nonfunctional languages discussed 
in this chapter.

13.9  Concurrency in Functional Languages

This section provides a brief overview of support for concurrency in several 
functional programming languages.

13.9.1  Multi-LISP

Multi-LISP  (Halstead,  1985)  is  an  extension  to  Scheme  that  allows  the 
programmer to specify program parts that can be executed concurrently. 
These forms of concurrency are implicit; the programmer is simply telling 
the compiler (or interpreter) some parts of the program that can be run 
concurrently.

One of the ways a programmer can tell the system about possible con-
currency is the pcall construct. If a function call is embedded in a  pcall 
construct, the parameters to the function can be evaluated concurrently. For 
example, consider the following pcall construct:

(pcall f a b c d)

The function is f, with parameters a, b, c, and d. The effect of pcall is that 
the parameters of the function can be evaluated concurrently (any or all of the 
parameters could be complicated expressions). Unfortunately, whether this pro-
cess can be safely used, that is, without affecting the semantics of the function 
evaluation, is the responsibility of the programmer. This is actually a simple 
matter if the language does not allow side effects or if the programmer designed 
the function not to have side effects or at least to have limited ones. However, 
Multi-LISP does allow some side effects. If the function was not written to 
avoid side effects, it may be difficult for the programmer to determine whether 
pcall can be safely used.

The future construct of Multi-LISP is a more interesting and poten-
tially more productive source of concurrency. As with pcall, a function call 
is wrapped in a future construct. Such a function is evaluated in a separate 
thread, with the parent thread continuing its execution. The parent thread 
continues until it needs to use the return value of the function. If the function 
has not completed its execution when its result is needed, the parent thread 
waits until it has before it continues.

If a function has two or more parameters, they can also be wrapped in 
future constructs, in which case their evaluations can be done concurrently 
in separate threads.

These are the only additions to Scheme in Multi-LISP.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   575

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
576 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

13.9.2  Concurrent ML

Concurrent ML (CML) is an extension to ML that includes a form of threads 
and a form of synchronous message passing to support concurrency. The lan-
guage is completely described in Reppy (1999).

A thread is created in CML with the spawn primitive, which takes the 
function as its parameter. In many cases, the function is specified as an anon-
ymous function. As soon as the thread is created, the function begins its exe-
cution in the new thread. The return value of the function is discarded. The 
effects of the function are either output produced or through communications 
with other threads. Either the parent thread (the one that spawned the new 
thread) or the child thread (the new one) could terminate first and it would not 
affect the execution of the other.

Channels provide the means of communicating between threads. A chan-
nel is created with the channel constructor. For example, the following state-
ment creates a channel of arbitrary type named mychannel:

let val mychannel = channel()

The  two  primary  operations  (functions)  on  channels  are  for  sending 
(send) and receiving (recv) messages. The type of the message is inferred 
from the send operation. For example, the following function call sends the 
integer value 7, and therefore the type of the channel is then inferred to be 
integer:

send(mychannel, 7)

The recv function names the channel as its parameter. Its return value is 

the value it received.

Because  CML  communications  are  synchronous,  a  message  is  both 
sent and received only if both the sender and the receiver are ready. If a 
thread sends a message on a channel and no other thread is ready to receive 
on  that  channel,  the  sender  is  blocked  and  waits  for  another  thread  to 
execute a recv on the channel. Likewise, if a recv is executed on a chan-
nel by a thread but no other thread has sent a message on that channel, 
the thread that ran the  recv is blocked and waits for a message on that  
channel.

Because channels are types, functions can take them as parameters.
As was the case with Ada’s synchronous message passing, an issue with 
CML synchronous message passing is deciding which message to choose when 
more than one channel has received one. And the same solution is used: the 
guarded command do-od construct that chooses randomly among messages to 
different channels.

The synchronization mechanism of CML is the event. An explanation 
of this complicated mechanism is beyond the scope of this chapter (and this 
book).

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   576

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
13.9.3  F#

13.9  Concurrency in Functional Languages 

  577

Part of the F# support for concurrency is based on the same .NET classes 
that are used by C#, specifically System.Threading.Thread. For example, 
suppose we want to run the function myConMethod in its own thread. The 
following function, when called, will create the thread and start the execution 
of the function in the new thread:

let createThread() =
    let newThread = new Thread(myConMethod)
    newThread.Start()

Recall that in C#, it is necessary to create an instance of a predefined delegate, 
ThreadStart, send its constructor the name of the subprogram, and send the 
new delegate instance as a parameter to the Thread constructor. In F#, if a 
function expects a delegate as its parameter, a lambda expression or a function 
can be sent and the compiler will behave as if you sent the delegate. So, in the 
above code, the function myConMethod is sent as the parameter to the Thread 
constructor, but what is actually sent is a new instance of ThreadStart (to 
which was sent myConMethod).

The Thread class defines the Sleep method, which puts the thread from 
which it is called to sleep for the number of milliseconds that is sent to it as a 
parameter.

Shared  immutable  data  does  not  require  synchronization  among  the 
threads that access it. However, if the shared data is mutable, which is possible 
in F#, locking will be required to prevent corruption of the shared data by 
multiple threads attempting to change it. A mutable variable can be locked 
while a function operates on it to provide synchronized access to the object 
with the lock function. This function takes two parameters, the first of which 
is the variable to be changed. The second parameter is a lambda expression 
that changes the variable.

A mutable heap-allocated variable is of type ref. For example, the follow-

ing declaration creates such a variable named sum with the initial value of 0:

let sum = ref 0

A ref type variable can be changed in a lambda expression that uses the 
ALGOL/Pascal/Ada assignment operator, :=. The ref variable must be pre-
fixed with an exclamation point (!) to get its value. In the following, the mutable 
variable sum is locked while the lambda expression adds the value of x to it:

lock(sum) (fun () -> sum := !sum + x)

Threads can be called asynchronously, just as with C#, using the same 
subprograms, BeginInvoke and EndInvoke, as well as the IAsyncResult 
interface to facilitate the determination of the completion of the execution of 
the asynchronously called thread.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   577

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
578 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

As stated previously, F# has the concurrent generic collections of .NET 
available to its programs. This can save a great deal of programming effort 
when building multithreaded programs that need a shared data structure in the 
form of a queue, stack, or bag.

13.10  Statement-Level Concurrency

In this section, we take a brief look at language design for statement-level 
concurrency. From the language design point of view, the objective of such 
designs is to provide a mechanism that the programmer can use to inform the 
compiler of ways it can map the program onto a multiprocessor architecture.9
In this section, only one collection of linguistic constructs from one lan-
guage for statement-level concurrency is discussed: High-Performance Fortran.

13.10.1  High-Performance Fortran

High-Performance Fortran (HPF; ACM, 1993b) is a collection of extensions 
to Fortran 90 that are meant to allow programmers to specify information to 
the compiler to help it optimize the execution of programs on multiproces-
sor computers. HPF includes both new specification statements and intrin-
sic, or built-in, subprograms. This section discusses only some of the HPF 
statements.

The primary specification statements of HPF are for specifying the num-
ber of processors, the distribution of data over the memories of those proces-
sors, and the alignment of data with other data in terms of memory placement. 
The HPF specification statements appear as special comments in a Fortran 
program. Each of them is introduced by the prefix !HPF$, where ! is the char-
acter used to begin lines of comments in Fortran 90. This prefix makes them 
invisible to Fortran 90 compilers but easy for HPF compilers to recognize.

The PROCESSORS specification has the following form:

!HPF$ PROCESSORS procs (n)

This statement is used to specify to the compiler the number of processors that 
can be used by the code generated for this program. This information is used 
in conjunction with other specifications to tell the compiler how data are to be 
distributed to the memories associated with the processors.

The DISTRIBUTE and ALIGN specifications are used to provide information 
to the compiler on machines that do not share memory—that is, each processor 
has its own memory. The assumption is that an access by a processor to its own 
memory is faster than an access to the memory of another processor.

9.  Although ALGOL 68 included a semaphore type that was meant to deal with 

 statement-level concurrency, we do not discuss that application of semaphores here.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   578

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
 
13.10  Statement-Level Concurrency 

  579

The DISTRIBUTE statement specifies what data are to be distributed and 

the kind of distribution that is to be used. Its form is as follows:

!HPF$ DISTRIBUTE (kind) ONTO procs :: identifier_list

In this statement, kind can be either BLOCK or CYCLIC. The identifier list is the 
names of the array variables that are to be distributed. A variable that is speci-
fied to be BLOCK distributed is divided into n equal groups, where each group 
consists of contiguous collections of array elements evenly distributed over 
the memories of all the processors. For example, if an array with 500 elements 
named LIST is BLOCK distributed over 5 processors, the first 100 elements of 
LIST will be stored in the memory of the first processor, the second 100 in the 
memory of the second processor, and so forth. A CYCLIC distribution specifies 
that individual elements of the array are cyclically stored in the memories of the 
processors. For example, if LIST is CYCLIC distributed, again over five proces-
sors, the first element of LIST will be stored in the memory of the first proces-
sor, the second element in the memory of the second processor, and so forth.

The form of the ALIGN statement is

ALIGN array1_element WITH array2_element

ALIGN is used to relate the distribution of one array with that of another. For 
example,

ALIGN list1(index) WITH list2(index+1)

specifies that the index element of list1 is to be stored in the memory of the 
same processor as the index+1 element of list2, for all values of index. The 
two array references in an ALIGN appear together in some statement of the 
program. Putting them in the same memory (which means the same processor) 
ensures that the references to them will be as close as possible.

Consider the following example code segment:

     REAL list_1 (1000), list_2 (1000)
     INTEGER list_3 (500), list_4 (501)
!HPF$ PROCESSORS proc (10)
!HPF$ DISTRIBUTE (BLOCK) ONTO procs :: list_1, list_2
!HPF$ ALIGN list_3 (index) WITH list_4 (index+1)
     . . .
     list_1 (index) = list_2 (index)
     list_3 (index) = list_4 (index+1)

In each execution of these assignment statements, the two referenced array 
elements will be stored in the memory of the same processor.

The HPF specification statements provide information for the compiler 
that it may or may not use to optimize the code it produces. What the compiler 
actually does depends on its level of sophistication and the particular architec-
ture of the target machine.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   579

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
580 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

The FORALL statement specifies a sequence of assignment statements that 

may be executed concurrently. For example,

FORALL (index = 1:1000)
  list_1(index) = list_2(index)
END FORALL

specifies the assignment of the elements of list_2 to the corresponding ele-
ments of list_1. However, the assignments are restricted to the following 
order: the right side of all 1,000 assignments must be evaluated first, before 
any assignments take place. This permits concurrent execution of all of the 
assignment statements. In addition to assignment statements, FORALL state-
ments can appear in the body of a FORALL construct. The FORALL statement is 
a good match with vector machines, in which the same instruction is applied to 
many data values, usually in one or more arrays. The HPF FORALL statement 
is included in Fortran 95 and subsequent versions of Fortran.

We have brief ly discussed only a small part of the capabilities of HPF. 
However, it should be enough to provide the reader with an idea of the kinds of 
language extensions that are useful for programming computers with possibly 
large numbers of processors.

C# 4.0 (and the other .NET languages) include two methods that behave 
somewhat like FORALL. They are loop control statements in which the itera-
tions can be unrolled and the bodies executed concurrently. These are Paral-
lel.For and Parallel.ForEach.

S U M M A R Y

Concurrent execution can be at the instruction, statement, or subprogram level. 
We use the phrase physical concurrency when multiple processors are actually 
used to execute concurrent units. If concurrent units are executed on a single 
processor, we use the term logical concurrency. The underlying conceptual model 
of all concurrency can be referred to as logical concurrency.

Most multiprocessor computers fall into one of two broad categories—

SIMD or MIMD. MIMD computers can be distributed.

Languages that support subprogram-level concurrency must provide two 
fundamental capabilities: mutually exclusive access to shared data structures 
(competition  synchronization)  and  cooperation  among  tasks  (cooperation 
synchronization).

Tasks  can  be  in  any  one  of  five  different  states:  new,  ready,  running, 

blocked, or dead.

Rather than designing language constructs for supporting concurrency, 

sometimes libraries, such as OpenMP, are used.

The design issues for language support for concurrency are how compe-
tition and cooperation synchronization are provided, how an application can 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   580

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
Summary 

  581

inf luence task scheduling, how and when tasks start and end their executions, 
and how and when they are created.

A semaphore is a data structure consisting of an integer and a task descrip-
tion queue. Semaphores can be used to provide both competition and coop-
eration synchronization among concurrent tasks. It is easy to use semaphores 
incorrectly, resulting in errors that cannot be detected by the compiler, linker, 
or run-time system.

Monitors are data abstractions that provide a natural way of providing 
mutually exclusive access to data shared among tasks. They are supported by 
several programming languages, among them Ada, Java, and C#. Cooperation 
synchronization in languages with monitors must be provided with some form 
of semaphores.

The underlying concept of the message-passing model of concurrency is 

that tasks send each other messages to synchronize their execution.

Ada  provides  complex  but  effective  constructs,  based  on  the  message- 
passing  model,  for  concurrency.  Ada’s  tasks  are  heavyweight  tasks.  Tasks 
communicate with each other through the rendezvous mechanism, which is 
synchronous message passing. A rendezvous is the action of a task accepting a 
message sent by another task. Ada includes both simple and complicated meth-
ods of controlling the occurrences of rendezvous among tasks.

Ada 95+ includes additional capabilities for the support of concurrency, 
primarily protected objects. Ada 95+ supports monitors in two ways, with tasks 
and with protected objects.

Java supports lightweight concurrent units in a relatively simple but effec-
tive way. Any class that either inherits from Thread or implements Runnable 
can override a method named run and have that method’s code executed con-
currently with other such methods and with the main program. Competition 
synchronization is specified by defining methods that access shared data to 
be implicitly synchronized. Small sections of code can also be implicitly syn-
chronized. A class whose methods are all synchronized is a monitor. Cooper-
ation synchronization is implemented with the methods wait, notify, and 
 notifyAll. The Thread class also provides the sleep, yield, join, and 
interrupt methods.

Java has direct support for counting semaphores through its Semaphore 
class and its acquire and release methods. It also had some classes for pro-
viding nonblocking atomic operations, such as addition, increment, and dec-
rement operations for integers. Java also provides explicit locks with the Lock 
interface and ReentrantLock class and its lock and unlock methods. In addi-
tion to implicit synchronization using synchronized, Java provides implicit 
nonblocking synchronization of int, long, and boolean type variables, as well 
as references and arrays. In these cases, atomic getters, setters, add, increment, 
and decrement operations are provided.

C#’s support for concurrency is based on that of Java but is slightly more 
sophisticated. Any method can be run in a thread. Both actor and server threads 
are supported. All threads are controlled through associated delegates. Server 
threads can be synchronously called with  Invoke or asynchronously called 

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   581

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
582 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

with BeginInvoke. A callback method address can be sent to the called thread. 
Three kinds of thread synchronization are supported with the Interlocked 
class, which provides atomic increment and decrement operations, the  Monitor 
class, and the lock statement.

All .NET languages have the use of the generic concurrent data structures 
for stacks, queues, and bags, for which competition synchronization is implicit.
Multi-LISP extends Scheme slightly to allow the programmer to inform 
the implementation about program parts that can be executed concurrently. 
Concurrent  ML  extends  ML  to  support  a  form  of  threads  and  a  form  of 
synchronous message passing among those threads. This message passing is 
designed with channels. F# programs have access to all of the .NET support 
classes for concurrency. Data shared among threads that is mutable can have 
access synchronized.

High-Performance Fortran includes statements for specifying how data 
is to be distributed over the memory units connected to multiple processors. 
Also included are statements for specifying collections of statements that can 
be executed concurrently.

B I B L I O G R A P H I C   N O T E S

The general subject of concurrency is discussed at great length in Andrews and 
Schneider (1983), Holt et al. (1978), and Ben-Ari (1982).

The monitor concept is developed and its implementation in Concurrent 

Pascal is described by Brinch Hansen (1977).

The early development of the message-passing model of concurrent unit 
control is discussed by Hoare (1978) and Brinch Hansen (1978). An in-depth 
discussion of the development of the Ada tasking model can be found in Ichbiah 
et al. (1979). Ada 95 is described in detail in ARM (1995). High-Performance 
Fortran is described in ACM (1993b).

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  What are the three possible levels of concurrency in programs?

2.  Describe the logical architecture of an SIMD computer.

3.  Describe the logical architecture of an MIMD computer.

4.  What level of program concurrency is best supported by SIMD 

computers?

5.  What level of program concurrency is best supported by MIMD 

computers?

6.  Describe the logical architecture of a vector processor.
7.  What is the difference between physical and logical concurrency?

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   582

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
Review Questions 

  583

8.  What is a thread of control in a program?

9.  Why are coroutines called quasi-concurrent?

10.  What is a multithreaded program?

11.  What are four reasons for studying language support for concurrency?

12.  What is a heavyweight task? What is a lightweight task?
13.  Define task, synchronization, competition and cooperation synchronization, 

liveness, race condition, and deadlock.

14.  What kind of tasks do not require any kind of synchronization?

15.  Describe the five different states in which a task can be.
16.  What is a task descriptor?

17.  In the context of language support for concurrency, what is a guard?

18.  What is the purpose of a task-ready queue?

19.  What are the two primary design issues for language support for 

concurrency?

20.  Describe the actions of the wait and release operations for semaphores.

21.  What is a binary semaphore? What is a counting semaphore?

22.  What are the primary problems with using semaphores to provide 

synchronization?

23.  What advantage do monitors have over semaphores?

24.  In what three common languages can monitors be implemented?
25.  Define rendezvous, accept clause, entry clause, actor task, server task, 
extended accept clause, open accept clause, closed accept clause, and 
completed task.

26.  Which is more general, concurrency through monitors or concurrency 

through message passing?

27.  Are Ada tasks created statically or dynamically?

28.  What purpose does an extended accept clause serve?

29.  How is cooperation synchronization provided for Ada tasks?

30.  What is the advantage of protected objects in Ada 95 over tasks for 

providing access to shared data objects?

31.  Specifically, what Java program unit can run concurrently with the main 

method in an application program?

32.  Are Java threads lightweight or heavyweight tasks?

33.  What does the Java sleep method do?

34.  What does the Java yield method do?
35.  What does the Java join method do?
36.  What does the Java interrupt method do?
37.  What are the two Java constructs that can be declared to be 

synchronized?

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   583

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
584 

  Chapter 13  

 Concurrency

38.  How can the priority of a thread be set in Java?

39.  Can Java threads be actor threads, server threads, or either?

40.  Describe the actions of the three Java methods that are used to support 

cooperation synchronization.

41.  What kind of Java object is a monitor?

42.  Explain why Java includes the Runnable interface.

43.  What are the two methods used with Java Semaphore objects?

44.  What is the advantage of the nonblocking synchronization in Java?

45.  What are the methods of the Java AtomicInteger class and what is the 

purpose of this class?

46.  How are explicit locks supported in Java?

47.  What kinds of methods can be run in a C# thread?

48.  Can C# threads be actor threads, server threads, or either?

49.  What are the two ways a C# thread can be called synchronously?

50.  How can a C# thread be called asynchronously?

51.  How is the returned value from an asynchronously called thread 

retrieved in C#?

52.  What is different about C#’s Sleep method, relative to Java’s sleep?

53.  What exactly does C#’s Abort method do?

54.  What is the purpose of C#’s Interlocked class?

55.  What does the C# lock statement do?

56.  On what language is Multi-LISP based?

57.  What is the semantics of Multi-LISP’s pcall construct?

58.  How is a thread created in CML?

59.  What is the type of an F# heap-allocated mutable variable?

60.  Why don’t F# immutable variables require synchronized access in a 

multithreaded program?

61.  What is the objective of the specification statements of HPF?

62.  What is the purpose of the FORALL statement of HPF and Fortran?

P R O B L E M   S E T

1.  Explain clearly why competition synchronization is not a problem in a 

programming environment that supports coroutines but not concurrency.

2.  What is the best action a system can take when deadlock is detected?
3.  Busy waiting is a method whereby a task waits for a given event by 

continuously checking for that event to occur. What is the main problem 
with this approach?

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   584

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
 
Programming Exercises 

  585

4.  In the producer-consumer example of Section 13.3, suppose that we 
incorrectly replaced the release(access) in the consumer process 
with wait(access). What would be the result of this error on execution 
of the system?

5.  From a book on assembly language programming for a computer 

that uses an Intel Pentium processor, determine what instructions are 
provided to support the construction of semaphores.

6.  Suppose two tasks, A and B, must use the shared variable Buf_Size. Task 
A adds 2 to Buf_Size, and task B subtracts 1 from it. Assume that such 
arithmetic operations are done by the three-step process of fetching 
the current value, performing the arithmetic, and putting the new value 
back. In the absence of competition synchronization, what sequences of 
events are possible and what values result from these operations? Assume 
that the initial value of Buf_Size is 6.

7.  Compare the Java competition synchronization mechanism with that of 

Ada.

8.  Compare the Java cooperation synchronization mechanism with that of 

Ada.

9.  What happens if a monitor procedure calls another procedure in the 

same monitor?

10.  Explain the relative safety of cooperation synchronization using 

semaphores and using Ada’s when clauses in tasks.

P R O G R A M M I N G   E X E R C I S E S

1.  Write an Ada task to implement general semaphores.

2.  Write an Ada task to manage a shared buffer such as the one in our 
example, but use the semaphore task from Programming Exercise 1.

3.  Define semaphores in Ada and use them to provide both cooperation 

and competition synchronization in the shared-buffer example.

4.  Write Programming Exercise 3 using Java.

5.  Write the shared-buffer example of the chapter in C#.

6.  The reader-writer problem can be stated as follows: A shared memory 
location can be concurrently read by any number of tasks, but when a 
task must write to the shared memory location, it must have exclusive 
access. Write a Java program for the reader-writer problem.

7.  Write Programming Exercise 6 using Ada.
8.  Write Programming Exercise 6 using C#.

M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   585

1/5/18   10:56 PM

 
 
 
M13_SEBE8029_12_SE_C13.indd   586

1/5/18   10:56 PM
