# Fuente
- archivo: 647-702.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/Robert W. Sebesta - Concepts of Programming Languages-Pearson (2019)/647-702.pdf
- extraido: 2026-03-26T16:13:34

# Contenido

15

Functional Programming 
Languages

  15.1 

Introduction

  15.2  Mathematical Functions

  15.3  Fundamentals of Functional Programming Languages

  15.4  The First Functional Programming Language: Lisp

  15.5  An Introduction to Scheme

  15.6  Common Lisp

  15.7  ML

  15.8  Haskell

  15.9  F#

 15.10 

 Support for Functional Programming in Primarily 

 Imperative Languages

 15.11 

 A Comparison of Functional and Imperative Languages

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   623

1/9/18   6:22 PM

623

624 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

T his chapter introduces functional programming and some of the programming 

languages that have been designed for this approach to software development. 
We begin by reviewing the fundamental ideas of mathematical functions, because 

functional languages are based on them. Next, the idea of a functional programming 
language is introduced, followed by a look at the first functional language, Lisp. The 
next, somewhat lengthy section, is devoted to an introduction to Scheme, including 
some of its primitive functions, special forms, functional forms, and some examples of 
simple functions written in Scheme. Next, we provide brief introductions to Common 
Lisp, ML, Haskell, and F#. Then, we discuss support for functional programming that 
is included in some imperative languages. The following section describes some of the 
applications of functional programming languages. Finally, we present a brief compar-
ison of functional and imperative languages.

15.1  Introduction

Most of the earlier chapters of this book have been concerned primarily with 
the imperative programming languages. The high degree of similarity among 
the imperative languages arises in part from one of the common bases of their 
design: the von Neumann architecture, as discussed in Chapter 1. Imperative 
languages can be thought of collectively as a progression of developments to 
improve the basic model, which was Fortran I. All have been designed to make 
efficient use of von Neumann architecture computers. Although the impera-
tive style of programming has been found acceptable by most programmers, 
its heavy reliance on the underlying architecture is thought by some to be an 
unnecessary restriction on the alternative approaches to software development.
Other bases for language design exist, some of them oriented more to par-
ticular programming paradigms or methodologies than to efficient execution 
on a particular computer architecture. Thus far, however, only a relatively small 
minority of programs have been written in nonimperative languages.

The functional programming paradigm, which is based on mathematical func-
tions, is the design basis of the most important nonimperative styles of languages. 
This style of programming is supported by functional programming languages.

The 1977 ACM Turing Award was given to John Backus for his work in 
the development of Fortran. Each recipient of this award presents a lecture 
when the award is formally given, and the lecture is subsequently published 
in the Communications of the ACM. In his Turing Award lecture, Backus (1978) 
made a case that purely functional programming languages are better than 
imperative languages because they result in programs that are more readable, 
more reliable, and more likely to be correct. The crux of his argument was 
that purely functional programs are easier to understand, both during and after 
development, largely because the meanings of expressions are independent of 
their context (one characterizing feature of a pure functional programming 
language is that neither expressions nor functions have side effects).

In this lecture, Backus proposed a pure functional language, FP ( functional 
programming), which he used to frame his argument. Although the language 

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   624

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.2  Mathematical Functions 

  625

did not succeed, at least in terms of achieving widespread use, his idea moti-
vated debate and research on pure functional programming languages. The 
point here is that some well-known computer scientists have attempted to pro-
mote the concept that functional programming languages are superior to the 
traditional imperative languages, though those efforts have obviously fallen 
short of their goals. However, over the last decade, prompted in part by the 
maturing of the typed functional languages, such as ML, Haskell, OCaml, and 
F#, there has been an increase in the interest in and use of functional program-
ming languages.

One of the fundamental characteristics of programs written in impera-
tive languages is that they have state, which changes throughout the execution 
process. This state is represented by the program’s variables. The author and 
all readers of the program must understand the uses of its variables and how 
the program’s state changes through execution. For a large program, this is a 
daunting task. This is one problem with programs written in an imperative 
language that is not present in a program written in a pure functional language, 
for such programs have neither variables nor state.

Lisp began as a pure functional language but soon acquired some import-
ant imperative features that increased its execution efficiency. It is still the most 
important of the functional languages, at least in the sense that it is the only one 
that has achieved widespread use. It dominates in the areas of knowledge rep-
resentation, machine learning, intelligent training systems, and the modeling 
of speech. Common Lisp is an amalgam of several early 1980s dialects of Lisp.
Scheme is a small, static-scoped dialect of Lisp. Scheme has been widely 
used to teach functional programming. It is also used in some universities to 
teach introductory programming courses.

The development of the typed functional programming languages, pri-
marily ML, Haskell, OCaml, and F#, has led to a significant expansion of the 
areas of computing in which functional languages are now used. As these lan-
guages have matured, their practical use is growing. They are now being used 
in areas such as database processing, financial modeling, statistical analysis, and 
bioinformatics.

One objective of this chapter is to provide an introduction to functional 
programming using the core of Scheme, intentionally leaving out its imperative 
features. Sufficient material on Scheme is included to allow the reader to write 
some simple but interesting programs. It is difficult to acquire an actual feel 
for functional programming without some actual programming experience, so 
that is strongly encouraged.

15.2  Mathematical Functions

A  mathematical  function  is  a  mapping  of  members  of  one  set,  called  the 
domain set, to another set, called the range set. A function definition spec-
ifies the domain and range sets, either explicitly or implicitly, along with the 
mapping. The mapping is described by an expression or, in some cases, by a 

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   625

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
626 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

table. Functions are often applied to a particular element of the domain set, 
given as a parameter to the function. Note that the domain set may be the cross 
product of several sets (ref lecting that there can be more than one parameter). 
A function yields an element of the range set.

One of the fundamental characteristics of mathematical functions is that 
the evaluation order of their mapping expressions is controlled by recursion 
and conditional expressions, rather than by the sequencing and iterative rep-
etition that are common to programs written in the imperative programming 
languages.

Another important characteristic of mathematical functions is that because 
they have no side effects and cannot depend on any external values, they always 
map a particular element of the domain to the same element of the range. 
However, a subprogram in an imperative language may depend on the current 
values of several nonlocal or global variables. This makes it difficult to deter-
mine statically what values the subprogram will produce and what side effects 
it will have on a particular execution.

In mathematics, there is no such thing as a variable that models a memory 
location. Local variables in functions in imperative programming languages 
maintain the state of the function. Computation is accomplished by evaluating 
expressions in assignment statements that change the state of the program. In 
mathematics, there is no concept of the state of a function.

A mathematical function maps its parameter(s) to a value (or values), rather 
than specifying a sequence of operations on values in memory to produce a 
value.

15.2.1  Simple Functions

Function definitions are often written as a function name, followed by a list of 
parameters in parentheses, followed by the mapping expression. For example,

cube(x) K x * x * x, where x is a real number.

In this definition, the domain and range sets are the real numbers. The symbol K  
is used to mean “is defined as.” The parameter x can represent any member of 
the domain set, but it is fixed to represent one specific element during evalua-
tion of the function expression. This is one way the parameters of mathematical 
functions differ from the variables in imperative languages.

Function applications are specified by pairing the function name with a 
particular element of the domain set. The range element is obtained by eval-
uating the function-mapping expression with the domain element substituted 
for the occurrences of the parameter. Once again, it is important to note that 
during evaluation, the mapping of a function contains no unbound parame-
ters, where a bound parameter is a name for a particular value. Every occur-
rence of a parameter is bound to a value from the domain set and is a constant 
during evaluation. For example, consider the following evaluation of cube(x):

cube (2.0) = 2.0 * 2.0 * 2.0 = 8

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   626

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.2  Mathematical Functions 

  627

The parameter x is bound to 2.0 during the evaluation and there are no unbound 
parameters. Furthermore, x is a constant (its value cannot be changed) during 
the evaluation.

Early theoretical work on functions separated the task of defining a func-
tion from that of naming the function. Lambda notation, as devised by Alonzo 
Church (1941), provides a method for defining nameless functions. A lambda 
expression specifies the parameters and the mapping of a function. The lambda 
expression is the function itself, which is nameless. For example, consider the 
following lambda expression:

l(x)x * x * x

Church defined a formal computation model (a formal system for function 
definition, function application, and recursion) using lambda expressions. This 
is called lambda calculus. Lambda calculus can be either typed or untyped. 
Untyped lambda calculus serves as the inspiration for the functional program-
ming languages.

As stated earlier, before evaluation a parameter represents any member 
of the domain set, but during evaluation it is bound to a particular member. 
When a lambda expression is evaluated for a given parameter, the expression 
is said to be applied to that parameter. The mechanics of such an application 
are the same as for any function evaluation. Application of the example lambda 
expression is denoted as in the following example:

(l(x)x * x * x)(2)

which results in the value 8.

Lambda expressions, like other function definitions, can have more than 

one parameter.

15.2.2  Functional Forms

A higher-order function, or functional form, is one that either takes one 
or more functions as parameters or yields a function as its result, or both. 
One common kind of functional form is function composition, which has 
two functional parameters and yields a function whose value is the first actual 
parameter function applied to the result of the second. Function composition 
is written as an expression, using º as an operator, as in

h K f ° g

For example, if

 f(x) K x + 2 
 g(x) K 3*x

then h is defined as

h(x) K f(g(x)), or h(x) K (3*x) + 2

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   627

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
628 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

Apply-to-all is a functional form that takes a single function as a parame-
ter.1 If applied to a list of parameters, apply-to-all applies its functional param-
eter to each of the values in the list parameter and collects the results in a list 
or sequence. Apply-to-all is denoted by a. Consider the following example:
Let

h(x) K x*x

then

a(h,(2,3,4)) yields (4, 9, 16)

There are other functional forms, but these two examples illustrate the 

basic characteristics of all of them.

15.3  Fundamentals of Functional Programming Languages

The objective of the design of a functional programming language is to mimic 
mathematical  functions  to  the  greatest  extent  possible.  This  results  in  an 
approach to problem solving that is fundamentally different from approaches 
used with imperative languages. In an imperative language, an expression is 
evaluated and the result is stored in a memory location, which is represented 
as a variable in a program. This is the purpose of assignment statements. This 
necessary attention to memory cells, whose values represent the state of the 
program, results in a relatively low-level programming methodology.

A program in an assembly language often must also store the results of 

partial evaluations of expressions. For example, to evaluate

(x + y)/(a - b)

the value of (x + y) is computed first. That value must then be stored while 
(a - b) is evaluated. The compiler handles the storage of intermediate results 
of expression evaluations in high-level languages. The storage of intermediate 
results is still required, but the details are hidden from the programmer.

A purely functional programming language does not use variables or assign-
ment statements, thus freeing the programmer from concerns related to the 
memory cells, or state, of the program. Without variables, iterative constructs 
are not possible, for they are controlled by variables. Repetition must be specified 
with recursion rather than with iteration. Programs are function definitions and 
function application specifications, and executions consist of evaluating function 
applications. Without variables, the execution of a purely functional program has 
no state in the sense of operational and denotational semantics. The execution 
of a function always produces the same result when given the same parameters. 
This characteristic is called referential transparency. It makes the semantics 
of purely functional languages far simpler than the semantics of the imperative 
languages (and the functional languages that include imperative features). It also 

1.  In programming languages, these are often called map functions.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   628

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
 
15.4  The First Functional Programming Language: Lisp 

  629

makes testing easier, because each function can be tested separately, without any 
concern for its context.

A functional language provides a set of primitive functions, a set of func-
tional forms to construct complex functions from those primitive functions, 
a function application operation, and some structure or structures for repre-
senting data. These structures are used to represent the parameters and values 
computed by functions. If a functional language is well designed, it requires 
only a relatively small number of primitive functions.

As we have seen in earlier chapters, the first functional programming lan-
guage, Lisp, uses a syntactic form for both data and code that is very different 
from that of the imperative languages. However, many functional languages 
designed later use syntax for their code that is similar to that of the imperative 
languages.

Although there are a few purely functional languages, for example, Haskell, 
most of the languages that are called functional include some imperative features, 
for example, mutable variables and constructs that act as assignment statements.
Some concepts and constructs that originated in functional languages, such 
as lazy evaluation and anonymous subprograms, have now found their way into 
some languages that are considered imperative.

Although early functional languages were often implemented with interpreters, 

many programs written in functional programming languages are now compiled.

15.4  The First Functional Programming Language: Lisp

Many functional programming languages have been developed. The oldest 
and most widely used is Lisp (or one of its descendants), which was developed 
by John McCarthy at MIT in 1959. Studying functional languages through 
Lisp is somewhat akin to studying the imperative languages through Fortran: 
Lisp was the first functional language, but although it has steadily evolved for 
half a century, it no longer represents the latest design concepts for functional 
languages. In addition, with the exception of the first version, all Lisp dialects 
include imperative-language features, such as imperative-style variables, assign-
ment statements, and iteration. (Imperative-style variables are used to name 
memory cells, whose values can change many times during program execution.) 
Despite this and their somewhat odd form, the descendants of the original Lisp 
represent well the fundamental concepts of functional programming and are 
therefore worthy of study.

15.4.1  Data Types and Structures

There were only two categories of data objects in the original Lisp: atoms and 
lists. List elements are pairs, where the first part is the data of the element, 
which is a pointer to either an atom or a nested list. The second part of a pair 
can be a pointer to an atom, a pointer to another element, or a special value, 
nil. Elements are linked together in lists with the second parts. Atoms and lists 

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   629

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
630 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

are not types in the sense that imperative languages have types. In fact, the 
original Lisp was a typeless language. Atoms are either symbols, in the form of 
identifiers, or numeric literals.

Recall from Chapter 2, that Lisp originally used lists as its data structure 
because they were thought to be an essential part of list processing. As it even-
tually developed, however, Lisp rarely requires the general list operations of 
insertion and deletion at positions other than the beginning of a list.

Lists are specified in Lisp by delimiting their elements with parentheses. 

The elements of simple lists are restricted to atoms, as in

(A B C D)

Nested list structures are also specified by parentheses. For example, the list

(A (B C) D (E (F G)))

is a list of four elements. The first is the atom A; the second is the sublist (B C); 
the third is the atom D; the fourth is the sublist (E  (F  G)), which has as its 
second element the sublist (F G).

In a Lisp implementation, a list is usually stored as linked list structure in 
which each node has two pointers, one to reference the data of the node and the 
other to form the linked list. A list is referenced by a pointer to its first element.
The  internal  representations  of  our  two  example  lists  are  shown  in  
Figure 15.1. Note that the elements of a list are shown horizontally. The last 

Figure 15.1

Internal representation 
of two Lisp lists

A

A

B

C

D

(A B C D)

D

C

B

E

(A (B C) D (E (F G)))

F

G

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   630

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.4  The First Functional Programming Language: Lisp 

  631

element of a list has no successor, so its link is nil. Sublists are shown with the 
same structure.

15.4.2  The First Lisp Interpreter

The original intent of Lisp’s design was to have a notation for programs that 
would be as close to Fortran’s as possible, with additions when necessary. This 
notation was called M-notation, for meta-notation. There was to be a compiler 
that would translate programs written in M-notation into semantically equiva-
lent machine code programs for the IBM 704.

Early in the development of Lisp, McCarthy wrote a paper to promote list 
processing as an approach to general symbolic processing. McCarthy believed 
that list processing could be used to study computability, that at the time 
was usually studied using Turing machines, which are based on the impera-
tive model of computation. McCarthy thought that the functional process-
ing of symbolic lists was a more natural model of computation than Turing 
machines, that operated on symbols written on tapes, which represented state. 
One of the common requirements of the study of computation is that one 
must be able to prove certain computability characteristics of the whole class 
of whatever model of computation is being used. In the case of the Turing 
machine model, one can construct a universal Turing machine that can mimic 
the operations of any other Turing machine. From this concept came the 
idea of constructing a universal Lisp function that could evaluate any other 
function in Lisp.

The first requirement for the universal Lisp function was a notation that 
allowed functions to be expressed in the same way data was expressed. The 
parenthesized list notation described in Section 15.4.1 had already been adopted 
for Lisp data, so it was decided to invent conventions for function definitions 
and function calls that could also be expressed in list notation. Function calls 
were specified in a prefix list form originally called Cambridge Polish,2 as in 
the following:

(function_name parameter1 cparametern)

For example, if + is a function that takes two or more numeric parameters, 

the following two expressions evaluate to 12 and 20, respectively:

(+ 5 7)
(+ 3 4 7 6)

2.  This name first was used in the early development of Lisp. The name was chosen because 
Lisp lists resemble the prefix notation used by the Polish logician Jan Lukasiewicz, and 
because Lisp was born at MIT in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Some now prefer to call the 
notation Cambridge prefix.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   631

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
632 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

The lambda notation described in Section 15.2.1 was chosen to specify 
function definitions. It had to be modified, however, to allow the binding of 
functions to names so that functions could be referenced by other functions 
and by themselves. This name binding was specified by a list consisting of the 
function name and a list containing the lambda expression, as in

(function_name (LAMBDA ( param1... paramn) expression))

If you have had no prior exposure to functional programming, it may seem 
odd to even consider a nameless function. However, nameless functions are 
sometimes useful in functional programming (as well as in mathematics and 
imperative programming). For example, consider a function whose action is 
to produce a function for immediate application to a parameter list. The pro-
duced function has no need for a name, for it is applied only at the point of its 
construction. Such an example is given in Section 15.5.14.

Lisp functions specified in this new notation were called S-expressions, for 
symbolic expressions. Eventually, all Lisp structures, both data and code, were 
called S-expressions. An S-expression can be either a list or an atom. We will 
usually refer to S-expressions simply as expressions.

McCarthy successfully developed a universal function that could evaluate 
any other function. This function was named EVAL and was itself in the form of 
an expression. Two of the people in the AI Project, which was developing Lisp, 
Stephen B. Russell and Daniel J. Edwards, noticed that an implementation of 
EVAL could serve as a Lisp interpreter, and they promptly constructed such an 
implementation (McCarthy et al., 1965).

There were several important results of this quick, easy, and unexpected 
implementation. First, all early Lisp implementations copied EVAL and were 
therefore interpretive. Second, the definition of M-notation, which was the 
planned  programming  notation  for  Lisp,  was  never  completed  or  imple-
mented, so S-expressions became Lisp’s only notation. The use of the same 
notation for data and code has important consequences, one of which will be 
discussed in Section 15.5.14. Third, much of the original language design 
was effectively frozen, keeping certain odd features in the language, such as 
the conditional expression form and the use of () for both the empty list and 
logical false.

Another feature of early Lisp systems that was apparently accidental was 
the use of dynamic scoping. Functions were evaluated in the environments 
of their callers. No one at the time knew much about scoping, and there may 
have been little thought given to the choice. Dynamic scoping was used for 
most dialects of Lisp before 1975. Contemporary dialects either use static 
scoping  or  allow  the  programmer  to  choose  between  static  and  dynamic 
scoping.

An interpreter for Lisp can be written in Lisp. Such an interpreter, which is 
not a large program, describes the operational semantics of Lisp, in Lisp. This 
is vivid evidence of the semantic simplicity of the language.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   632

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.5  An Introduction to Scheme

15.5  An Introduction to Scheme 

  633

In this section, we describe the core part of Scheme (Dybvig, 2011). We have 
chosen Scheme because it is relatively simple, it is popular in colleges and 
universities,  and  Scheme  interpreters  are  readily  available  (and  free)  for  a 
wide variety of computers. The version of Scheme described in this section 
is Scheme 4. Note that this section covers only a small part of Scheme, and it 
includes none of Scheme’s imperative features.

15.5.1  Origins of Scheme

The Scheme language, which is a dialect of Lisp, was developed at MIT in the 
mid-1970s (Sussman and Steele, 1975). It is characterized by its small size, its 
exclusive use of static scoping, and its treatment of functions as first-class enti-
ties. As first-class entities, Scheme functions can be the values of expressions, 
elements of lists, passed as parameters, and returned from functions. Early 
versions of Lisp did not provide all of these capabilities.

As an essentially typeless small language with simple syntax and semantics, 
Scheme is well suited to educational applications, such as courses in functional 
programming, and also to general introductions to programming.

Most of the Scheme code in the following sections would require only 

minor modifications to be converted to valid Lisp code.

15.5.2  The Scheme Interpreter

A Scheme interpreter in interactive mode is an infinite read-evaluate-print loop 
(often abbreviated as REPL). It repeatedly reads an expression typed by the 
user (in the form of a list), interprets the expression, and displays the resulting 
value. This form of interpreter is also used by Ruby and Python. Expressions 
are interpreted by the function EVAL. Literals evaluate to themselves. So, if you 
type a number to the interpreter, it simply displays the number. Expressions 
that are calls to primitive functions are evaluated in the following way: First, 
each of the parameter expressions is evaluated, in no particular order. Then, 
the primitive function is applied to the parameter values, and the resulting 
value is displayed.

Of course, Scheme programs that are stored in files can be loaded and 

interpreted.

Comments in Scheme are any text following a semicolon on any line.

15.5.3  Primitive Numeric Functions

Scheme includes primitive functions for the basic arithmetic operations. These 
are +, -, *, and /, for add, subtract, multiply, and divide. * and + can have zero 
or more parameters. If * is given no parameters, it returns 1; if + is given no 
parameters, it returns 0. + adds all of its parameters together. * multiplies all 

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   633

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
634 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

its parameters together. / and - can have two or more parameters. In the case 
of subtraction, all but the first parameter are subtracted from the first. Division 
is similar to subtraction. Some examples are:

Expression
42

(* 3 7)

(+ 5 7 8)

(- 5 6)

(- 15 7 2)

(- 24 (* 4 3))

Value
42

21

20

-1

6

12

There are a large number of other numeric functions in Scheme, among 
them MODULO, ROUND, MAX, MIN, LOG, SIN, and SQRT. SQRT returns the square 
root of its numeric parameter, if the parameter’s value is not negative. If the 
parameter is negative, SQRT yields a complex number.

In Scheme, note that we use uppercase letters for all reserved words and 
predefined functions. The official definition of the language specifies that there 
is no distinction between uppercase and lowercase in these. However, some 
implementations, for example DrRacket’s teaching languages, require lower-
case for reserved words and predefined functions.

If a function has a fixed number of parameters, such as SQRT, the number 
of parameters in the call must match that number. If not, the interpreter will 
produce an error message.

15.5.4  Defining Functions

A Scheme program is a collection of function definitions. Consequently, know-
ing how to define these functions is a prerequisite to writing the simplest pro-
gram. In Scheme, a nameless function actually includes the word LAMBDA, and 
is called a lambda expression. For example,

(LAMBDA (x) (* x x))

is a nameless function that returns the square of its given numeric parameter. 
This function can be applied in the same way that named functions are: by 
placing it in the beginning of a list that contains the actual parameters. For 
example, the following expression yields 49:

((LAMBDA (x) (* x x)) 7)

In this expression, x is called a bound variable within the lambda expression. 
During the evaluation of this expression, x is bound to 7. A bound variable 
never changes in the expression after being bound to an actual parameter value 
at the time evaluation of the lambda expression begins.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   634

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.5  An Introduction to Scheme 

  635

Lambda expressions can have any number of parameters. For example, we 

could have the following:

(LAMBDA (a b c x) (+ (* a x x) (* b x) c))

The Scheme special form function DEFINE serves two fundamental needs 
of Scheme programming: to bind a name to a value and to bind a name to a 
lambda expression. The form of DEFINE that binds a name to a value may make 
it appear that DEFINE can be used to create imperative language-style variables. 
However, these name bindings create named values, not variables.

DEFINE is called a special form because it is interpreted (by EVAL) in a 
different way than the normal primitives like the arithmetic functions, as we 
shall soon see.

The simplest form of DEFINE is one used to bind a name to the value of 

an expression. This form is

(DEFINE symbol expression)

For example,

(DEFINE pi 3.14159)
(DEFINE two_pi (* 2 pi))

If these two expressions have been typed to the Scheme interpreter and then 
pi is typed, the number 3.14159 will be displayed; when two_pi is typed, 
6.28318 will be displayed. In both cases, the displayed numbers may have more 
digits than are shown here.

This form of DEFINE is analogous to a declaration of a named constant 
in an imperative language. For example, in Java, the equivalents to the above 
defined names are as follows:

final float PI = 3.14159;
final float TWO_PI = 2.0 * PI;

Names  in  Scheme  can  consist  of  letters,  digits,  and  special  characters 

except parentheses; they are case insensitive and must not begin with a digit.

The second use of the DEFINE function is to bind a lambda expression 
to a name. In this case, the lambda expression is abbreviated by removing the 
word LAMBDA. To bind a name to a lambda expression, DEFINE takes two lists 
as parameters. The first parameter is the prototype of a function call, with the 
function name followed by the formal parameters, together in a list. The sec-
ond list contains an expression to which the name is to be bound. The general 
form of such a DEFINE is3

3.  Actually, the general form of DEFINE has as its body a list containing a sequence of one 

or more expressions, although in most cases only one is included. We include only one for 
 simplicity’s sake.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   635

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
636 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

(DEFINE (function_name parameters)
      (expression)
)

Of course, this form of DEFINE is the definition of a named function.

The following example call to DEFINE binds the name square to a func-

tional expression that takes one parameter:

(DEFINE (square number) (* number number))

After the interpreter evaluates this function, it can be used, as in

(square 5)

which displays 25.

To illustrate the difference between primitive functions and the DEFINE 

special form, consider the following:

(DEFINE x 10)

If DEFINE were a primitive function, EVAL’s first action on this expression would 
be to evaluate the two parameters of DEFINE. If x were not already bound to a 
value, this would be an error. Furthermore, if x were already defined, it would 
also be an error, because this DEFINE would attempt to redefine x, which is 
illegal. Remember, x is the name of a value; it is not a variable in the imperative 
sense.

Following is another example of a function. It computes the length of the 
hypotenuse (the longest side) of a right triangle, given the lengths of the two 
other sides.

(DEFINE (hypotenuse side1 side2)
    (SQRT(+(square side1)(square side2)))
)

Notice that hypotenuse uses square, which was defined previously.

15.5.5  Output Functions

Scheme includes a few simple output functions, but when used with the interac-
tive interpreter, most output from Scheme programs is the normal output from 
the interpreter, displaying the results of applying EVAL to top-level functions.
Note that explicit input and output are not part of the pure functional 
programming model, because input operations change the program state and 
output operations have side effects. Neither of these can be part of a pure func-
tional language. Therefore, this chapter does not describe the explicit input or 
output functions of Scheme.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   636

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.5  An Introduction to Scheme 

  637

15.5.6  Numeric Predicate Functions

A predicate function is one that returns a Boolean value (some representation 
of either true or false). Scheme includes a collection of predicate functions for 
numeric data. Among them are the following:

Function

=

<>

>

<

>=

<=

EVEN?

ODD?

ZERO?

Meaning

Equal

Not equal

Greater than

Less than

Greater than or equal to

Less than or equal to

Is it an even number?

Is it an odd number?

Is it zero?

Notice that the names for all predefined predicate functions that have 
words for names end with question marks. In Scheme, the two Boolean values 
are #T and #F (or #t and #f), although the Scheme predefined predicate func-
tions return the empty list, (), for false.

When a list is interpreted as a Boolean, any nonempty list evaluates to 
true; the empty list evaluates to false. This is similar to the interpretation of 
integers in C as Boolean values; zero evaluates to false and any nonzero value 
evaluates to true.

In the interest of readability, all of our example predicate functions in this 

chapter return #F, rather than ().

The NOT function is used to invert the logic of a Boolean expression.

15.5.7  Control Flow

Scheme uses three different constructs for control f low: one similar to the 
selection construct of the imperative languages and two based on the evaluation 
control used in mathematical functions.

The Scheme two-way selector function, named IF, has three parameters: 
a predicate expression, a then expression, and an else expression. A call to IF 
has the form

(IF predicate then_expression else_expression)

For example,

(DEFINE (factorial n)
  (IF (<= n 1)

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   637

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
638 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

    1
    (* n (factorial (- n 1)))
))

Recall that the multiple selection of Scheme, COND, was discussed in  

Chapter 8. Following is an example of a simple function that uses COND:

(DEFINE (leap? year)
  (COND
    ((ZERO? (MODULO year 400)) #T)
    ((ZERO? (MODULO year 100)) #F)
    (ELSE (ZERO? (MODULO year 4)))
))

The following subsections contain additional examples of the use of COND.
The third Scheme control mechanism is recursion, which is used, as in math-
ematics, to specify repetition. Most of the example functions in Section 15.5.10 
use recursion.

15.5.8  List Functions

One of the more common uses of the Lisp-based programming languages is list 
processing. This subsection introduces the Scheme functions for dealing with 
lists. Recall that Scheme’s list operations were brief ly introduced in Chapter 6. 
Following is a more detailed discussion of list processing in Scheme.

Scheme programs are interpreted by the function application function, 
EVAL. When applied to a primitive function, EVAL first evaluates the parame-
ters of the given function. This action is necessary when the actual parameters 
in a function call are themselves function calls, which is frequently the case. 
In some calls, however, the parameters are data elements rather than function 
references. When a parameter is not a function reference, it obviously should 
not be evaluated. We were not concerned with this earlier, because numeric lit-
erals always evaluate to themselves and cannot be mistaken for function names.
Suppose we have a function that has two parameters, an atom and a list, and 
the purpose of the function is to determine whether the given atom is in the 
given list. Neither the atom nor the list should be evaluated; they are literal data 
to be processed. To avoid evaluating a parameter, it is first given as a parameter 
to the primitive function QUOTE, which simply returns it without change. The 
following examples illustrate QUOTE:

(QUOTE A) returns A
(QUOTE (A B C)) returns (A B C)

Calls to QUOTE are usually abbreviated by preceding the expression to be 
quoted with an apostrophe (') and leaving out the parentheses around the 
expression. Thus, instead of (QUOTE (A B)), '(A B) is used.

The  necessity  of  QUOTE  arises  because  of  the  fundamental  nature  of 
Scheme (and the other Lisp-based languages): data and code have the same 

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   638

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.5  An Introduction to Scheme 

  639

form. Although this may seem odd to imperative language programmers, it 
results in some interesting and powerful processes, one of which is discussed 
in Section 15.5.14.

The CAR, CDR, and CONS functions were introduced in Chapter 6. 

Following are additional examples of the operations of CAR and CDR:

(CAR '(A B C)) returns A
(CAR '((A B) C D)) returns (A B)
(CAR 'A) is an error because A is not a list
(CAR '(A)) returns A
(CAR '()) is an error
(CDR '(A B C)) returns (B C)
(CDR '((A B) C D)) returns (C D)
(CDR 'A) is an error
(CDR '(A)) returns ()
(CDR '()) is an error

The names of the CAR and CDR functions are peculiar at best. The ori-
gin of these names lies in the first implementation of Lisp, which was on an 
IBM 704 computer. The 704’s memory words had two fields, named decrement 
and address, that were used in various operand addressing strategies. Each of 
these fields could store a machine memory address. The 704 also included two 
machine instructions, also named CAR (contents of the address part of a regis-
ter) and CDR (contents of the decrement part of a register), that extracted the 
associated fields. It was natural to use the two fields to store the two pointers 
of a list node so that a memory word could neatly store a node. Using these 
conventions, the CAR and CDR instructions of the 704 provided efficient list 
selectors. The names carried over into the primitives of all dialects of Lisp.

As another example of a simple function, consider

(DEFINE (second a_list) (CAR (CDR a_list)))

Once this function is evaluated, it can be used, as in

(second '(A B C))

which returns B.

Some of the most commonly used functional compositions in Scheme are built 
in as single functions. For example, (CAAR  x) is equivalent to (CAR(CAR  x)), 
(CADR  x) is equivalent to (CAR  (CDR  x)), and (CADDAR  x) is equivalent to 
(CAR (CDR (CDR (CAR x)))). Any combination of A’s and D’s, up to four, are 
legal between the ‘C’ and the ‘R’ in the function’s name. As an example, consider the 
following evaluation of CADDAR:

(CADDAR '((A B (C) D) E)) =
(CAR (CDR (CDR (CAR '((A B (C) D) E))))) =
(CAR (CDR (CDR '(A B (C) D)))) =

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   639

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
640 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

(CAR (CDR '(B (C) D))) =
(CAR '((C) D)) =
(C)

Following are example calls to CONS:

(CONS 'A '()) returns (A)
(CONS 'A '(B C)) returns (A B C)
(CONS '() '(A B)) returns (() A B)
(CONS '(A B) '(C D)) returns ((A B) C D)

The results of these CONS operations are shown in Figure 15.2. Note that 
CONS is, in a sense, the inverse of CAR and CDR. CAR and CDR take a list apart, 
and CONS constructs a new list from two given list parts. The two parameters 
to CONS become the CAR and CDR of the new list. Thus, if a_list is a list, then

(CONS (CAR a_list) (CDR a_list))

returns a list with the same structure and same elements as a_list.

Figure 15.2

The result of several 
CONS operations

(CONS 'A '()) 

(A)

A

(CONS 'A '(B C)) 

(A B C)

A

(CONS '() '(A B)) 

(()A B)

(CONS '(A B) '(C D)) 

((A B) C D)

NIL

A

C

B

D

B

A

C

B

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   640

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.5  An Introduction to Scheme 

  641

Dealing only with the relatively simple problems and programs discussed 
in this chapter, it is unlikely one would intentionally apply CONS to two atoms, 
although that is legal. The result of such an application is a dotted pair, so 
named because of the way it is displayed by Scheme. For example, consider 
the following call:

(CONS 'A 'B)

If the result of this is displayed, it would appear as

(A . B)

This dotted pair indicates that instead of an atom and a pointer or a pointer 
and a pointer, this cell has two atoms.

LIST is a function that constructs a list from a variable number of parameters. 
It is a shorthand version of nested CONS functions, as illustrated in the following:

(LIST 'apple 'orange 'grape)

returns

(apple orange grape)

Using CONS, the call to LIST above is written as follows:

(CONS 'apple (CONS 'orange (CONS 'grape '())))

15.5.9  Predicate Functions for Symbolic Atoms and Lists

Scheme has three fundamental predicate functions, EQ?, NULL?, and LIST?, 
for symbolic atoms and lists.

The EQ? function takes two expressions as parameters, although it is  usually 
used with two symbolic atom parameters. It returns #T if both parameters have 
the same pointer value—that is, they point to the same atom or list; otherwise, 
it returns #F. If the two parameters are symbolic atoms, EQ? returns #T if they 
are the same symbols (because Scheme does not make duplicates of symbols); 
otherwise #F. Consider the following examples:

(EQ? 'A 'A) returns #T
(EQ? 'A 'B) returns #F
(EQ? 'A '(A B)) returns #F
(EQ? '(A B) '(A B)) returns #F or #T
(EQ? 3.4 (+ 3 0.4)) returns #F or #T

As the fourth example indicates, the result of comparing lists with EQ? is not 
consistent. The reason for this is that two lists that are exactly the same often 
are not duplicated in memory. At the time the Scheme system creates a list, 

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   641

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
642 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

it checks to see whether there is already such a list. If there is, the new list is 
nothing more than a pointer to the existing list. In these cases, the two lists 
will be judged equal by EQ?. However, in some cases, it may be difficult to 
detect the presence of an identical list, in which case a new list is created. In 
this scenario, EQ? yields #F.

The last case shows that the addition may produce a new value, in which 
case it would not be equal (with EQ?) to 3.4, or it may recognize that it already 
has the value 3.4 and use it, in which case EQ? will use the pointer to the old 
3.4 and return #T.

As we have seen, EQ? works for symbolic atoms but does not necessarily 
work for numeric atoms. The = predicate works for numeric atoms but not 
symbolic atoms. As discussed previously, EQ? also does not work reliably for 
list parameters.

Sometimes it is convenient to be able to test two atoms for equality when it 
is not known whether they are symbolic or numeric. For this purpose, Scheme 
has a different predicate, EQV?, which works on both numeric and symbolic 
atoms. Consider the following examples:

(EQV? 'A 'A) returns #T
(EQV? 'A 'B) returns #F
(EQV? 3 3) returns #T
(EQV? 'A 3) returns #F
(EQV? 3.4 (+ 3 0.4)) returns #T
(EQV? 3.0 3) returns #F

Notice that the last example demonstrates that f loating-point values are dif-
ferent  from  integer  values.  EQV?  is  not  a  pointer  comparison,  it  is  a  value 
comparison.

The primary reason to use EQ? or = rather than EQV? when it is possible is 

that EQ? and = are faster than EQV?.

The LIST? predicate function returns #T if its single argument is a list and 

#F otherwise, as in the following examples:

(LIST? '(X Y)) returns #T
(LIST? 'X) returns #F
(LIST? '()) returns #T

The NULL? function tests its parameter to determine whether it is the empty 
list and returns #T if it is. Consider the following examples:

 (NULL? '(A B)) returns #F
(NULL? '()) returns #T
(NULL? 'A) returns #F
(NULL? '(())) returns #F

The last call yields #F because the parameter is not the empty list. Rather, it is 
a list containing a single element, the empty list.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   642

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.5.10  Example Scheme Functions

15.5  An Introduction to Scheme 

  643

This  section  contains  several  examples  of  function  definitions  in  Scheme. 
These programs solve simple list-processing problems.

Consider the problem of membership of a given atom in a given list that 
does not include sublists. Such a list is called a simple list. If the function is 
named member, it could be used as follows:

(member 'B '(A B C)) returns #T
(member 'B '(A C D E)) returns #F

Thinking in terms of iteration, the membership problem is simply to com-
pare the given atom and the individual elements of the given list, one at a time 
in some order, until either a match is found or there are no more elements in 
the list to be compared. A similar process can be accomplished using recur-
sion. The function can compare the given atom with the CAR of the list. If they 
match, the value #T is returned. If they do not match, the CAR of the list should 
be ignored and the search continued on the CDR of the list. This can be done by 
having the function call itself with the CDR of the list as the list parameter and 
return the result of this recursive call. This process will end if the given atom 
is found in the list. If the atom is not in the list, the function will eventually 
be called (by itself) with a null list as the actual parameter. That event must 
force the function to return #F. In this process, there are two ways out of the 
recursion: Either the list is empty on some call, in which case #F is returned, 
or a match is found and #T is returned.

Altogether, there are three cases that must be handled in the function: an 
empty input list, a match between the atom and the CAR of the list, or a mis-
match between the atom and the CAR of the list, which causes the recursive call. 
These three are the three parameters to COND, with the last being the default 
case that is triggered by an ELSE predicate. The complete function follows:4

(DEFINE (member atm a_list)
  (COND
    ((NULL? a_list) #F)
    ((EQ? atm (CAR a_list)) #T)
    (ELSE (member atm (CDR a_list)))
))

This form is typical of simple Scheme list-processing functions. In such func-
tions, the data in lists are processed one element at a time. The individual 
elements are specified with CAR, and the process is continued using recursion 
on the CDR of the list.

Note that the null test must precede the equal test, because applying CAR 

to an empty list is an error.

4.  Most Scheme systems define a function named member and do not allow a user to redefine 
it. So, if the reader wants to try this function, it must be defined with some other name.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   643

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
644 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

As another example, consider the problem of determining whether two 
given lists are equal. If the two lists are simple, the solution is relatively easy, 
although some programming techniques with which the reader may not be 
familiar are involved. A predicate function, equalsimp, for comparing simple 
lists is shown here:

(DEFINE (equalsimp list1 list2)
  (COND
    ((NULL? list1) (NULL? list2))
    ((NULL? list2) #F)
    ((EQ? (CAR list1) (CAR list2))
          (equalsimp (CDR list1) (CDR list2)))
    (ELSE #F)
))

The first case, which is handled by the first parameter to COND, is for when 
the first list parameter is the empty list. This can occur in an external call if the 
first list parameter is initially empty. Because a recursive call uses the CDRs of 
the two parameter lists as its parameters, the first list parameter can be empty 
in such a call (if the first list parameter is now empty). When the first list 
parameter is empty, the second list parameter must be checked to see whether 
it is also empty. If so, they are equal (either initially or the CARs were equal on 
all previous recursive calls), and NULL? correctly returns #T. If the second list 
parameter is not empty, it is larger than the first list parameter and #F should 
be returned, as it is by NULL?.

The next case deals with the second list being empty when the first list is 
not. This situation occurs only when the first list is longer than the second. 
Only the second list must be tested, because the first case catches all instances 
of the first list being empty.

The third case is the recursive step that tests for equality between two 
corresponding elements in the two lists. It does this by comparing the CARs 
of the two nonempty lists. If they are equal, then the two lists are equal up to 
that point, so recursion is used on the CDRs of both. This case fails when two 
unequal atoms are found. When this occurs, the process need not continue, so 
the default case ELSE is selected, which returns #F.

Note that equalsimp expects lists as parameters and does not operate 

correctly if either or both parameters are atoms.

The problem of comparing general lists is slightly more complex than 
this, because sublists must be traced completely in the comparison process. 
In this situation, the power of recursion is uniquely appropriate, because 
the form of sublists is the same as that of the given lists. Any time the cor-
responding elements of the two given lists are lists, they are separated into 
their two parts, CAR and CDR, and recursion is used on them. This is a per-
fect example of the usefulness of the divide-and-conquer approach. If the 
corresponding elements of the two given lists are atoms, they can simply be 
compared using EQ?.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   644

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.5  An Introduction to Scheme 

  645

The definition of the complete function follows:

(DEFINE (equal list1 list2)
  (COND
    ((NOT (LIST? list1)) (EQ? list1 list2))
    ((NOT (LIST? list2)) #F)
    ((NULL? list1) (NULL? list2))
    ((NULL? list2) #F)
    ((equal (CAR list1) (CAR list2))
            (equal (CDR list1) (CDR list2)))
    (ELSE #F)
))

The first two cases of the COND handle the situation where either of the param-
eters is an atom instead of a list. The third and fourth cases are for the situation 
where one or both lists are empty. These cases also prevent subsequent cases 
from attempting to apply CAR to an empty list. The fifth COND case is the most 
interesting. The predicate is a recursive call with the CARs of the lists as param-
eters. If this recursive call returns #T, then recursion is used again on the CDRs 
of the lists. This algorithm allows the two lists to include sublists to any depth.
This definition of equal works on any pair of expressions, not just lists. 
equal is equivalent to the system predicate function EQUAL?. Note that EQUAL? 
should be used only when necessary (the forms of the actual parameters are not 
known), because it is much slower than EQ? and EQV?.

Another commonly needed list operation is that of constructing a new list 
that contains all of the elements of two given list arguments. This is usually 
implemented as a Scheme function named append. The result list can be con-
structed by repeated use of CONS to place the elements of the first list argument 
into the second list argument, which becomes the result list. To clarify the 
action of append, consider the following examples:

(append '(A B) '(C D R)) returns (A B C D R)
(append '((A B) C) '(D (E F))) returns ((A B) C D (E F))

The definition of append is5

(DEFINE (append list1 list2)
  (COND
    ((NULL? list1) list2)
    (ELSE (CONS (CAR list1) (append (CDR list1) list2)))
))

The first COND case is used to terminate the recursive process when the first 
argument list is empty, returning the second list. In the second case (the ELSE), 

5.  As was the case with member, a user usually cannot define a function named append.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   645

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
646 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

the CAR of the first parameter list is CONSed onto the result returned by the 
recursive call, which passes the CDR of the first list as its first parameter.

Consider the following Scheme function, named guess, which uses the 
member function described in this section. Try to determine what it does before 
reading the description that follows it. Assume the parameters are simple lists.

(DEFINE (guess list1 list2)
  (COND
    ((NULL? list1) '())
    ((member (CAR list1) list2)
             (CONS (CAR list1) (guess (CDR list1) list2)))
    (ELSE (guess (CDR list1) list2))
))

guess yields a simple list that contains the common elements of its two param-
eter lists. So, if the parameter lists represent sets, guess computes a list that 
represents the intersection of those two sets.

15.5.11  LET

LET is a function (initially described in Chapter 5) that creates a local scope in 
which names are temporarily bound to the values of expressions. It is often used 
to factor out the common subexpressions from more complicated expressions. 
These names can then be used in the evaluation of another expression, but they 
cannot be rebound to new values in LET. The following example illustrates the 
use of  LET. It computes the roots of a given quadratic equation, assuming 
the  roots  are  real.6  The  mathematical  definitions  of  the  real  (as  opposed  
to  complex)  roots  of  the  quadratic  equation  ax2 + bx + c  are  as  follows: 
root1 = (-b + sqrt(b2 - 4 ac))/2a and root 2 = (-b - sqrt(b2 - 4 ac))/2 a

(DEFINE (quadratic_roots a b c)
  (LET (
    (root_part_over_2a
                (/ (SQRT (- (* b b) (* 4 a c))) (* 2 a)))
    (minus_b_over_2a (/ (- 0 b) (* 2 a)))
        )
  (LIST (+ minus_b_over_2a root_part_over_2a)
             (- minus_b_over_2a root_part_over_2a))
))

This example uses LIST to create the list of the two values that make up the 
result.

Because the names bound in the first part of a LET construct cannot be 
changed in the following expression, they are not the same as local variables in 

6.  Some versions of Scheme include “complex” as a data type and will compute the roots of the 

equation, regardless of whether they are real or complex.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   646

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
 
15.5  An Introduction to Scheme 

  647

a block in an imperative language. They could all be eliminated by textual sub-
stitution of their respective expressions for their names in the LET expression.
LET is actually shorthand for a LAMBDA expression applied to a parameter. 

The following two expressions are equivalent:

(LET ((alpha 7))(* 5 alpha))
((LAMBDA (alpha) (* 5 alpha)) 7)

In the first expression, 7 is bound to alpha with LET; in the second, 7 is bound 
to alpha through the parameter of the LAMBDA expression.

15.5.12  Tail Recursion in Scheme

A function is tail recursive if its recursive call is the last operation in the func-
tion. This means that the return value of the recursive call is the return value 
of the nonrecursive call to the function. For example, the member function of 
Section 15.5.10, repeated here, is tail recursive.

(DEFINE (member atm a_list)
  (COND
    ((NULL? a_list) #F)
    ((EQ? atm (CAR a_list)) #T)
    (ELSE (member atm (CDR a_list)))
))

This function can be automatically converted by a compiler to use iteration, 
resulting in faster execution than in its recursive form.

However, many functions that use recursion for repetition are not tail 
recursive. Programmers who are concerned with efficiency have discovered 
ways to rewrite some of these functions so that they are tail recursive. One 
example of this uses an accumulating parameter and a helper function. As an 
example of this approach, consider the factorial function from Section 15.5.7, 
which is repeated here:

(DEFINE (factorial n)
  (IF (<= n 1)
    1
    (* n (factorial (- n 1)))
))

The last operation of this function is the multiplication. The function works 
by creating the list of numbers to be multiplied together and then doing the 
multiplications as the recursion unwinds to produce the result. Each of these 
numbers is created by an activation of the function and each is stored in an acti-
vation record instance. As the recursion unwinds the numbers are multiplied 
together. Recall that the stack is shown after several recursive calls to factorial 
in Chapter 9. This factorial function can be rewritten with an auxiliary helper 

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   647

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
648 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

function, which uses a parameter to accumulate the partial factorial. The helper 
function, which is tail recursive, also takes factorial’s parameter. These func-
tions are as follows:

(DEFINE (facthelper n factpartial)
  (IF (<= n 1)
    factpartial
    (facthelper (- n 1) (* n factpartial))
))
(DEFINE (factorial n)
  (facthelper n 1)
)

With these functions, the result is computed during the recursive calls, rather 
than as the recursion unwinds. Because there is nothing useful in the activa-
tion record instances, they are not necessary. Regardless of how many recur-
sive calls are requested, only one activation record instance is necessary. This 
makes the tail-recursive version far more efficient than the non-tail-recursive 
version.

The Scheme language definition requires that Scheme language process-
ing systems convert all tail-recursive functions to replace that recursion with 
iteration. Therefore, it is important, at least for efficiency’s sake, to define 
functions that use recursion to specify repetition to be tail recursive. Some 
optimizing compilers for some functional languages can even perform con-
versions of some non-tail-recursive functions to equivalent tail-recursive func-
tions and then code these functions to use iteration instead of recursion for 
repetition.

15.5.13  Functional Forms

This section describes two common mathematical functional forms that are 
provided by Scheme: composition and apply-to-all. Both are mathematically 
defined in Section 15.2.2.

15.5.13.1  Functional Composition

Functional composition is the only primitive functional form provided by the 
original Lisp. All subsequent Lisp dialects, including Scheme, also provide 
it. As stated in Section 15.2.2, function composition is a functional form that 
takes two functions as parameters and returns a function that first applies the 
second parameter function to its parameter and then applies the first parameter 
function to the return value of the second parameter function. In other words, 
the function h is the composition function of f and g if h(x) = f(g(x)). For 
example, consider the following example:

(DEFINE (g x) (* 3 x))
(DEFINE (f x) (+ 2 x))

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   648

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.5  An Introduction to Scheme 

  649

Now the functional composition of f and g can be written as follows:

(DEFINE (h x) (+ 2 (* 3 x)))

In Scheme, the functional composition function compose can be written 

as follows:

(DEFINE (compose f g) (LAMBDA (x)(f (g x))))

For example, we could have the following:

((compose CAR CDR) '((a b) c d))

This call would yield c. This is an alternative, though less efficient, form of 
CADR. Now consider another call to compose:

((compose CDR CAR) '((a b) c d))

This call would yield (b). This is an alternative to CDAR.

As yet another example of the use of compose, consider the following:

(DEFINE (third a_list)
 ((compose CAR (compose CDR CDR)) a_list))

This is an alternative to CADDR.

15.5.13.2  An Apply-to-All Functional Form

The  most  common  functional  forms  provided  in  functional  programming 
 languages are variations of mathematical apply-to-all functional forms. The 
simplest of these is map, which has two parameters: a function and a list. map 
applies the given function to each element of the given list and returns a list of 
the results of these applications. A Scheme definition of map follows:7

(DEFINE (map fun a_list)
  (COND
    ((NULL? a_list) '())
    (ELSE (CONS (fun (CAR a_list)) (map fun (CDR a_list))))
))

Note the simple form of map, which expresses a complex functional form.

As an example of the use of map, suppose we want all of the elements of a 

list cubed. We can accomplish this with the following:

(map (LAMBDA (num) (* num num num)) '(3 4 2 6))

7.  As was the case with member, map is a predefined function that cannot be redefined by users.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   649

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
650 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

This call returns (27 64 8 216).

Note  that  in  this  example,  the  first  parameter  to  mapcar  is  a  LAMBDA 
expression. When EVAL evaluates the LAMBDA expression, it constructs a func-
tion that has the same form as any predefined function except that it is name-
less. In the example expression, this nameless function is immediately applied 
to each element of the parameter list and the results are returned in a list.

15.5.14  Functions That Build Code

The fact that programs and data have the same structure can be exploited 
in constructing programs. Recall that the Scheme interpreter uses a function 
named  EVAL. The Scheme system applies  EVAL to every expression typed, 
whether it is at the Scheme prompt in the interactive interpreter or is part of 
a program being interpreted. The EVAL function can also be called directly by 
Scheme programs. This provides the possibility of a Scheme program creating 
expressions and calling EVAL to evaluate them. This is not something that is 
unique to Scheme, but the simple forms of its expressions make it easy to create 
them during execution.

One of the simplest examples of this process involves numeric atoms. Recall 
that Scheme includes a function named +, which takes any number of numeric 
atoms as arguments and returns their sum. For example,  (+  3  7  10  2)  
returns 22.

Our problem is the following: Suppose that in a program we have a list 
of numeric atoms and need the sum. We cannot apply + directly on the list, 
because + can take only atomic parameters, not a list of numeric atoms. We 
could, of course, write a function that repeatedly adds the CAR of the list to the 
sum of its CDR, using recursion to go through the list. Such a function follows:

(DEFINE (adder a_list)
  (COND
    ((NULL? a_list) 0)
    (ELSE (+ (CAR a_list) (adder (CDR a_list))))
))

Following is an example call to adder, along with the recursive calls and 

returns:

(adder '(3 4 5))
(+ 3 (adder (4 5)))
(+ 3 (+ 4 (adder (5))))
(+ 3 (+ 4 (+ 5 (adder ()))))
(+ 3 (+ 4 (+ 5 0)))
(+ 3 (+ 4 5))
(+ 3 9)
(12)

An alternative solution to the problem is to write a function that builds a 
call to + with the proper parameter forms. This can be done by using CONS to 

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   650

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.6  Common Lisp 

  651

build a new list that is identical to the parameter list except it has the atom + 
inserted at its beginning. This new list can then be submitted to EVAL for eval-
uation, as in the following:

(DEFINE (adder a_list)
  (COND
    ((NULL? a_list) 0)
    (ELSE (EVAL (CONS '+ a_list)))
))

Note that the + function’s name is quoted to prevent EVAL from evaluating it 
in the evaluation of CONS. Following is an example call to this new version of 
adder, along with the call to EVAL and the return value:

(adder '(3 4 5))
(EVAL (+ 3 4 5)
(12)

In all earlier versions of Scheme, the EVAL function evaluated its expression 
in the outermost scope of the program. The later versions of Scheme, beginning 
with Scheme 4, requires a second parameter to EVAL that specifies the scope in 
which the expression is to be evaluated. For simplicity’s sake, we left the scope 
parameter out of our example, and we do not discuss scope names here.

15.6  Common Lisp

Common Lisp (Steele, 1990) was created in an effort to combine the features of 
several early 1980s dialects of Lisp, including Scheme, into a single language. 
Being something of a union of languages, it is quite large and complex, similar 
in these regards to C++ and C#. Its basis, however, is the original Lisp, so its 
syntax, primitive functions, and fundamental nature come from that language.

Following is the factorial function written in Common Lisp:

(DEFUN factorial (x)
  (IF (<= n 1)
    1
    (* n factorial (- n 1)))
))

Only the first line of this function differs syntactically from the Scheme version 
of the same function.

The list of features of Common Lisp is long: a large number of data types 
and  structures,  including  records,  arrays,  complex  numbers,  and  character 
strings;  powerful  input  and  output  operations;  and  a  form  of  packages  for 
modularizing collections of functions and data, and also for providing access 
control. Common Lisp includes several imperative constructs, as well as some 
mutable types.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   651

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
652 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

Recognizing the occasional f lexibility provided by dynamic scoping, as 
well as the simplicity of static scoping, Common Lisp allows both. The default 
scoping for variables is static, but by declaring a variable to be “special,” that 
variable becomes dynamically scoped.

Macros are often used in Common Lisp to extend the language. In fact, 
some of the predefined functions are actually macros. For example, DOLIST, 
which takes two parameters, a variable and a list, is a macro. For example, 
consider the following:

(DOLIST (x '(1 2 3)) (print x))

This produces the following:

1
2
3
NIL

NIL here is the return value of DOLIST.

Macros create their effect in two steps: First, the macro is expanded. Sec-
ond, the expanded macro, which is Lisp code, is evaluated. Users can define 
their own macros with DEFMACRO.

The Common Lisp backquote operator (`) is similar to Scheme’s QUOTE, 
except some parts of the parameter can be unquoted by preceding them with 
commas. For example, consider the following two examples:

`(a (* 3 4) c)

This expression evaluates to (a (* 3 4) c). However, the following expression:

`(a ,(* 3 4) c)

evaluates to (a 12 c).

Lisp implementations have a front end called the reader that transforms the 
text of Lisp programs into a code representation. Then, the macro calls in the 
code representation are expanded into code representations. The output of this 
step is then either interpreted or compiled into the machine language of the 
host computer, or perhaps into an intermediate code than can be interpreted. 
There is a special kind of macro, named reader macros or read macros, that are 
expanded during the reader phase of a Lisp language processor. A reader macro 
expands a specific character into a string of Lisp code. For example, the apos-
trophe in Lisp is a read macro that expands to a call to QUOTE. Users can define 
their own reader macros to create other shorthand constructs.

Common Lisp, as well as other Lisp-based languages, have a symbol data 
type. The reserved words are symbols that evaluate to themselves, as are T and 
NIL. Technically, symbols are either bound or unbound. Parameter symbols are 
bound while the function is being evaluated. Also, symbols that are the names 

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   652

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.7  ML

15.7  ML 

  653

of imperative-style variables and have been assigned values are bound. Other 
symbols are unbound. For example, consider the following expression:

(LIST '(A B C))

The symbols A, B, and C are unbound. Recall that Ruby also has a symbol data 
type.

In a sense, Scheme and Common Lisp are opposites. Scheme is far smaller 
and semantically simpler, in part because of its exclusive use of static scoping, 
but also because it was designed to be used for teaching programming, whereas 
Common Lisp was meant to be a commercial language. Common Lisp has 
succeeded in being a widely used language for AI applications, among other 
areas. Scheme, on the other hand, is more frequently used in college courses on 
functional programming. It is also more likely to be studied as a functional lan-
guage because of its relatively small size. An important design goal of Common 
Lisp that caused it to be a large language was the desire to make it compatible 
with several of the dialects of Lisp from which it was derived.

The Common Lisp Object System (CLOS) (Paepeke, 1993) was developed 
in the late 1980s as an object-oriented version of Common Lisp. This language 
supports generic functions and multiple inheritance, among other constructs.

ML (Milner et al., 1997) is a static-scoped functional programming language, 
like Scheme. However, it differs from Lisp and its dialects, including Scheme, 
in a number of significant ways. One important difference is that ML is a 
strongly typed language, whereas Scheme is essentially typeless. ML has type 
declarations for function parameters and the return types of functions, although 
because  of  its  type  inferencing  they  are  often  not  used.  The  type  of  every 
variable and expression can be statically determined. ML, like other functional 
programming languages, does not have variables in the sense of the imperative 
languages. It does have identifiers, which have the appearance of names of 
variables in imperative languages. However, these identifiers are best thought 
of as names for values. Once set, they cannot be changed. They are like the 
named constants of imperative languages like final declarations in Java. ML 
identifiers do not have fixed types—any identifier can be the name of a value 
of any type.

A table called the evaluation environment stores the names of all implic-
itly and explicitly declared identifiers in a program, along with their types. This 
is like a run-time symbol table. When an identifier is declared, either implicitly 
or explicitly, it is placed in the evaluation environment.

Another important difference between Scheme and ML is that ML uses a 
syntax that is more closely related to that of an imperative language than that 
of Lisp. For example, arithmetic expressions are written in ML using infix 
notation.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   653

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
654 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

Function declarations in ML appear in the general form

fun function_name(formal parameters) = expression;

When called, the value of the expression is returned by the function. Actu-
ally, the expression can be a list of expressions, separated by semicolons and 
surrounded by parentheses. The return value in this case is that of the last 
expression. Of course, unless they have side effects, the expressions before the 
last serve no purpose. Because we are not considering the parts of ML that 
have side effects, we only consider function definitions with a single expression.
Now we can discuss type inference. Consider the following ML function 

declaration:

fun circumf(r) = 3.14159 * r * r;

This specifies a function named circumf that takes a f loating-point (real in 
ML) parameter and produces a f loating-point result. The types are inferred 
from the type of the literal in the expression. Likewise, in the function

fun times10(x) = 10 * x;

the parameter and functional value are inferred to be of type int.

Consider the following ML function:

fun square(x) = x * x;

ML determines the type of both the parameter and the return value from the * 
operator in the function definition. Because this is an arithmetic operator, the 
type of the parameter and the function are assumed to be numeric. In ML,  
the default numeric type is int. So, it is inferred that the type of the parameter 
and the return value of square is int.

If square were called with a f loating-point value, as in

square(2.75);

it would cause an error, because ML does not coerce real values to int type. If 
we wanted square to accept real parameters, it could be rewritten as

fun square(x) : real = x * x;

Because ML does not allow overloaded functions, this version could not coexist 
with the earlier int version. The last version defined would be the only one.

The fact that the functional value is typed real is sufficient to infer that 

the parameter is also real type. Each of the following definitions is also legal:

fun square(x : real) = x * x;
fun square(x) = (x : real) * x;
fun square(x) = x * (x : real);

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   654

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.7  ML 

  655

Type inference is also used in the functional languages Miranda, Haskell, 

and F#.

The ML selection control f low construct is similar to that of the impera-

tive languages. It has the following general form:

if expression then then_expression else else_expression

The first expression must evaluate to a Boolean value.

The conditional expressions of Scheme can appear at the function defi-
nition level in ML. In Scheme, the COND function is used to determine the 
value of the given parameter, which in turn specifies the value returned by 
COND. In ML, the computation performed by a function can be defined for 
different forms of the given parameter. This feature is meant to mimic the 
form and meaning of conditional function definitions in mathematics. In 
ML,  the  particular  expression  that  defines  the  return  value  of  a  function 
is chosen by pattern matching against the given parameter. For example, 
without using this pattern matching, a function to compute factorial could 
be written as follows:

fun fact(n : int): int = if n <= 1 then 1
                         else n * fact(n - 1);

Multiple definitions of a function can be written using parameter pattern 
matching. The different function definitions that depend on the form of the 
parameter are separated by an OR symbol (|). For example, using pattern 
matching, the factorial function could be written as follows:

fun fact(0) = 1
|   fact(1) = 1
|  fact(n : int): int = n * fact(n - 1);

If fact is called with the actual parameter 0, the first definition is used; if 
the actual parameter is 1, the second definition is used; if an int value that is 
neither 0 nor 1 is sent, the third definition is used.

As discussed in Chapter 6, ML supports lists and list operations. Recall that 

hd, tl, and :: are ML’s versions of Scheme’s CAR, CDR, and CONS.

Because of the availability of patterned function parameters, the hd and tl 
functions are much less frequently used in ML than CAR and CDR are used in 
Scheme. For example, in a formal parameter, the expression

(h :: t)

is  actually  two  formal  parameters,  the  head  and  tail  of  given  list  parame-
ter, while the single corresponding actual parameter is a list. For example, 
the number of elements in a given list can be computed with the following 
function:

fun length([]) = 0
|   length(h :: t) = 1 + length(t);

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   655

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
656 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

As another example of these concepts, consider the append function, which 
does what the Scheme append function does:

fun append([], lis2) = lis2
|   append(h :: t, lis2) = h :: append(t, lis2);

The first case in this function handles the situation of the function being called 
with an empty list as the first parameter. This case also terminates the recursion 
when the initial call has a nonempty first parameter. The second case of the func-
tion breaks the first parameter list into its head and tail (hd and tl). The head is 
CONSed onto the result of the recursive call, which uses the tail as its first parameter.
In ML, names are bound to values with value declaration statements of 

the form

val new_name = expression;

For example,

val distance = time * speed;

Do not get the idea that this statement is exactly like the assignment statements 
in the imperative languages, for it is not. The val statement binds a name to a 
value, but the name cannot be later rebound to a new value. Well, in a sense it 
can. Actually, if you do rebind a name with a second val statement, it causes a 
new entry in the evaluation environment that is not related to the previous ver-
sion of the name. In fact, after the new binding, the old evaluation environment 
entry (for the previous binding) is no longer visible. Also, the type of the new 
binding need not be the same as that of the previous binding. val statements 
do not have side effects. They simply add a name to the current evaluation 
environment and bind it to a value.

The normal use of val is in a let expression.8 Consider the following 

example:

let val radius = 2.7
    val pi = 3.14159
in pi * radius * radius
end;

ML includes several higher-order functions that are commonly used in 
functional programming. Among these are a filtering function for lists,  filter, 
which takes a predicate function as its parameter. The predicate function is 
often given as a lambda expression, which in ML is defined exactly like a func-
tion, except with the fn reserved word, instead of fun, and of course the lambda 
expression is nameless. filter returns a function that takes a list as a parame-
ter. It tests each element of the list with the predicate. Each element on which 
the predicate returns true is added to a new list, which is the return value of 
the function. Consider the following use of filter:

8.  Let expressions in ML were introduced in Chapter 5.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   656

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
 
15.7  ML 

  657

filter(fn(x) => x < 100, [25, 1, 50, 711, 100, 150, 27,
    161, 3]);

This application would return [25, 1, 50, 27, 3].

The map function takes a single parameter, which is a function. The result-
ing function takes a list as a parameter. It applies its function to each element 
of the list and returns a list of the results of those applications. Consider the 
following code:

fun cube x = x * x * x;
val cubeList = map cube;
val newList = cubeList [1, 3, 5];

After execution, the value of newList is [1, 27, 125]. This could be done more 
simply by defining the cube function as a lambda expression, as in the following:

val newList = map (fn x => x * x * x, [1, 3, 5]);

ML has a binary operator for composing two functions, o (a lowercase 
“oh”). For example, to build a function h that first applies function f and then 
applies function g to the returned value from f, we could use the following:

val h = g o f;

Strictly speaking, ML functions take a single parameter. When a function 
is defined with more than one parameter, ML considers the parameters to be 
a tuple, even though the parentheses that normally delimit a tuple value are 
optional. The commas that separate the parameters (tuple elements) are required.
The process of currying replaces a function with more than one parameter 
with a function with one parameter that returns a function that takes the other 
parameters of the initial function.

ML functions that take more than one parameter can be defined in curried 
form by leaving out the commas between the parameters (and the delimiting 
parentheses).9 For example, we could have the following:

fun add a b = a + b;

Although this appears to define a function with two parameters, it actually defines 
one with just one parameter. The add function takes an integer parameter (a) 
and returns a function that also takes an integer parameter (b). A call to this 
function also excludes the commas between the parameters, as in the following:

add 3 5;

This call to add returns 8, as expected.

9.  This form of functions is named for Haskell Curry, a British mathematician who studied them.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   657

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
658 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

Curried functions are interesting and useful because new functions can be 
constructed from them by partial evaluation. Partial evaluation means that the 
function is evaluated with actual parameters for one or more of the leftmost 
formal parameters. For example, we could define a new function as follows:

fun add5 x = add 5 x;

The add5 function takes the actual parameter 5 and evaluates the add function 
with 5 as the value of its first formal parameter. It returns a function that adds 
5 to its single parameter, as in the following:

val num = add5 10;

The value of num is now 15. We could create any number of new functions 
from the curried function add to add any specific number to a given parameter.
Curried functions also can be written in Scheme, Haskell, and F#.  Consider 

the following Scheme function:

(DEFINE (add x y) (+ x y))

A curried version of this would be as follows:

DEFINE (add y) (LAMBDA (x) (+ y x)))

This can be called as follows:

((add 3) 4)

ML has enumerated types, arrays, and tuples. ML also has exception han-

dling and a module facility for implementing abstract data types.

ML has had a significant impact on the evolution of programming lan-
guages. For language researchers, it has become one of the most studied lan-
guages. Furthermore, it has spawned several subsequent languages, among 
them Haskell, Caml, OCaml, and F#.

15.8  Haskell

Haskell (Thompson, 1999) is similar to ML in that it uses a similar syntax, is 
static scoped, is strongly typed, and uses the same type inferencing method. 
There are three characteristics of Haskell that set it apart from ML: First, func-
tions in Haskell can be overloaded (functions in ML cannot). Second, nonstrict 
semantics are used in Haskell, whereas in ML (and most other programming 
languages) strict semantics are used. Third, Haskell is a pure functional pro-
gramming language, meaning it has no expressions or statements that have side 
effects, whereas ML allows some side effects (for example, ML has mutable 

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   658

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.8  Haskell 

  659

arrays). Both nonstrict semantics and function overloading are further discussed 
later in this section.

The code in this section is written in version 1.4 of Haskell.
Consider the following definition of the factorial function, which uses 

 pattern matching on its parameters:

fact 0 = 1
fact 1 = 1
fact n = n * fact (n - 1)

Note the differences in syntax between this definition and its ML version in 
Section 15.7. First, there is no reserved word to introduce the function defini-
tion (fun in ML). Second, alternative definitions of functions (with different 
formal parameters) all have the same appearance.

Using pattern matching, we can define a function for computing the nth 

Fibonacci number with the following:

fib 0 = 1
fib 1 = 1
fib (n + 2) = fib (n + 1) + fib n

Guards can be added to lines of a function definition to specify the circum-

stances under which the definition can be applied. For example,

fact n
  | n == 0 = 1
  | n == 1 = 1
  | n > 1 = n * fact(n - 1)

This definition of factorial is more precise than the previous one, as it restricts 
the range of actual parameter values to those for which it works. This form 
of a function definition is called a conditional expression, after the mathematical 
expressions on which it is based.

An otherwise can appear as the last condition in a conditional expression, 

with the obvious semantics. For example,

sub n
  | n < 10    = 0
  | n > 100   = 2
  | otherwise = 1

Notice the similarity between the guards here and the guarded commands 
discussed in Chapter 8.

Consider the following function definition, whose purpose is the same as 

the corresponding ML function in Section 15.7:

square x = x * x

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   659

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
660 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

In this case, however, because of Haskell’s support for polymorphism, this func-
tion can take a parameter of any numeric type.

As with ML, lists are written in brackets in Haskell, as in

colors = [”blue”, ”green”, ”red”, ”yellow”]

Haskell includes a collection of list operators. For example, lists can be 
catenated with ++, : serves as an infix version of CONS, and .. is used to specify 
an arithmetic series in a list. For example,

5:[2, 7, 9] results in [5, 2, 7, 9]
[1, 3..11] results in [1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11]
[1, 3, 5] ++ [2, 4, 6] results in [1, 3, 5, 2, 4, 6]

Notice that the : operator is just like ML’s :: operator.10 Using : and pattern 
matching, we can define a simple function to compute the product of a given 
list of numbers:

product [] = 1
product (a:x) = a * product x

Using product, we can write a factorial function in the simpler form

fact n = product [1..n]

Haskell includes a let construct that is similar to ML’s let and val. For 

example, we could write

quadratic_root a b c =
    let minus_b_over_2a = - b / (2.0 * a)
     root_part_over_2a =
                sqrt(b ^ 2 - 4.0 * a * c) / (2.0 * a)
    in
     minus_b_over_2a - root_part_over_2a,
     minus_b_over_2a + root_part_over_2a

Haskell’s list comprehensions were introduced in Chapter 6. For example, 

consider the following example of a list comprehension:

[n * n * n | n <- [1..50]]

This defines a list of the cubes of the numbers from 1 to 50. It is read as “a list of 
all n*n*n such that n is taken from the range of 1 to 50.” In this case, the qualifier 
is in the form of a generator. It generates the numbers from 1 to 50. In other 

10.  It is interesting that ML uses : for attaching a type name to a name and : : for CONS, while 

Haskell uses these two operators in exactly opposite ways.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   660

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
 
15.8  Haskell 

  661

cases, the qualifiers are in the form of Boolean expressions and they are called 
tests. This notation can be used to describe algorithms for doing many things, 
such as finding permutations of lists and sorting lists. For example, consider the 
following function, which when given a number n returns a list of all its factors:

factors n = [ i | i <-  [1..n ‘div‘ 2], n ‘mod‘ i == 0]

The list comprehension in factors creates a list of numbers, each temporarily 
bound to the name i, ranging from 1 to n/2, such that n `mod` i is zero. This 
is indeed a very exacting and short definition of the factors of a given number. 
The backticks (backward apostrophes) surrounding div and mod are used to 
specify the infix use of these functions. When they are called in functional 
notation, as in div n 2, the backticks are not used.

Next, consider the concision of Haskell illustrated in the following imple-

mentation of the quicksort algorithm:

sort [] = []
sort (h:t) = sort [b | b <- t, b <- h]
             ++ [h] ++
             sort [b | b <- t, b > h]

In this program, the set of list elements that are smaller or equal to the list head 
are sorted and catenated with the head element, then the set of elements that 
are greater than the list head are sorted and catenated onto the previous result. 
This definition of quicksort is significantly shorter and simpler than the same 
algorithm coded in an imperative language.

A programming language is strict if it requires all actual parameters to be 
fully evaluated, which ensures that the value of a function does not depend on 
the order in which the parameters are evaluated. A language is nonstrict if it 
does not have the strict requirement. Nonstrict languages can have several 
distinct advantages over strict languages. First, nonstrict languages are generally 
more efficient, because some evaluation is avoided.11 Second, some interesting 
capabilities are possible with nonstrict languages that are not possible with strict 
languages. Among these are infinite lists. Nonstrict languages can use an eval-
uation form called lazy evaluation, which means that expressions are evaluated 
only if and when their values are needed.

Recall that in Scheme the parameters to a function are fully evaluated 
before the function is called, so it has strict semantics. Lazy evaluation means 
that an actual parameter is evaluated only when its value is necessary to evaluate 
the function. So, if a function has two parameters, but on a particular execution 
of the function the first parameter is not used, the actual parameter passed for 
that execution will not be evaluated. Furthermore, if only a part of an actual 
parameter must be evaluated for an execution of the function, the rest is left 

11.  Notice how this is related to short-circuit evaluation of Boolean expressions, which is done 

in some imperative languages.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   661

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
662 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

unevaluated. Finally, actual parameters are evaluated only once, if at all, even if 
the same actual parameter appears more than once in a function call.

As stated previously, lazy evaluation allows one to define infinite data struc-

tures. For example, consider the following:

positives = [0..]
evens = [2, 4..]
squares = [n * n | n <- [0..]]

Of course, no computer can actually represent all of the numbers of these lists, 
but that does not prevent their use if lazy evaluation is used. For example, if we 
wanted to know if a particular number was a perfect square, we could check the 
squares list with a membership function. Suppose we had a predicate function 
named member that determined whether a given atom is contained a given list. 
Then we could use it as in

member 16 squares

which would return True. The squares definition would be evaluated until 
the 16 was found. The member function would need to be carefully written. 
Specifically, suppose it were defined as follows:

15.9  F#

member b [] = False
member b (a:x)= (a == b) || member b x

The second line of this definition breaks the first parameter into its head and 
tail. Its return value is true if either the head matches the element for which 
it is searching (b) or if the recursive call with the tail of the list returns True.

This definition of member would work correctly with squares only if the 
given number were a perfect square. If not, squares would keep generating 
squares forever, or until some memory limitation was reached, looking for the 
given number in the list. The following function performs the membership 
test of an ordered list, abandoning the search and returning False if a number 
greater than the searched-for number is found.12

member2 n (m:x)
  | m < n     = member2 n x
  | m == n    = True
  | otherwise = False

Lazy evaluation sometimes provides a modularization tool. Suppose that 
in a program there is a call to function f and the parameter to f is the return 
value of a function g.13 So, we have f(g(x)). Further suppose that g produces 
a large amount of data, a little at a time, and that f must then process this data, 

12.  This assumes that the list is in ascending order.
13.  This example appears in Hughes (1989).

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   662

1/9/18   6:22 PM

a little at a time. In a conventional imperative language, g would run on the 

whole input producing a file of its output. Then f would run using the file as 

its input. This approach requires the time to both write and read the file, as 

well as the storage for the file. With lazy evaluation, the executions of f and 

g implicitly would be tightly synchronized. Function g will execute only long 

enough to produce enough data for f to begin its processing. When f is ready 

for more data, g will be restarted to produce more, while f waits. If f termi-

nates without getting all of g’s output, g is aborted, thereby avoiding useless 

computation. Also, g need not be a terminating function, perhaps because it 

produces an infinite amount of output. g will be forced to terminate when f 

terminates. So, under lazy evaluation, g runs as little as possible. This evalua-

tion process supports the modularization of programs into generator units and 

selector units, where the generator produces a large number of possible results 

and the selector chooses the appropriate subset.

Lazy evaluation is not without its costs. It would certainly be surprising if 

such expressive power and f lexibility were free. In this case, the cost is in a far 

more complicated semantics, which results in much slower speed of execution.

F# is a .NET functional programming language whose core is based on OCaml, 

which is a descendant of ML and Haskell. Although it is fundamentally a func-

tional language, it includes imperative features and supports object-oriented 

programming. One of the most important characteristics of F# is that it has 

a full-featured IDE, an extensive library of utilities that supports imperative, 

object-oriented, and functional programming, and has interoperability with a 

collection of nonfunctional languages (all of the .NET languages).

F# is a first-class .NET language. This means that F# programs can interact 

in every way with other .NET languages. For example, F# classes can be used 

and subclassed by programs in other languages, and vice versa. Furthermore, 

F# programs have access to all of the .NET Framework APIs. The F# imple-

mentation is available free from Microsoft (http://research.microsoft 

.com/fsharp/fsharp.aspx). It is also supported by Visual Studio.

F# includes a variety of data types. Among these are tuples, like those 

of Python and the functional languages ML and Haskell, lists, discriminated 

unions, an expansion of ML’s unions, and records, like those of ML, which 

are like tuples except the components are named. F# has both mutable and 

immutable arrays.

methods of List.

Recall from Chapter 6, that F#’s lists are similar to those of ML, except 

that the elements are separated by semicolons and hd and tl must be called as 

F# supports sequence values, which are types from the .NET namespace 

System.Collections.Generic.IEnumerable. In F#, sequences are abbre-

viated as seq<type>, where <type> indicates the type of the generic. For exam-

ple, the type seq<int> is a sequence of integer values. Sequence values can be 

 
 
 
 
 
 
15.9  F#

15.9  F# 

  663

a little at a time. In a conventional imperative language, g would run on the 
whole input producing a file of its output. Then f would run using the file as 
its input. This approach requires the time to both write and read the file, as 
well as the storage for the file. With lazy evaluation, the executions of f and 
g implicitly would be tightly synchronized. Function g will execute only long 
enough to produce enough data for f to begin its processing. When f is ready 
for more data, g will be restarted to produce more, while f waits. If f termi-
nates without getting all of g’s output, g is aborted, thereby avoiding useless 
computation. Also, g need not be a terminating function, perhaps because it 
produces an infinite amount of output. g will be forced to terminate when f 
terminates. So, under lazy evaluation, g runs as little as possible. This evalua-
tion process supports the modularization of programs into generator units and 
selector units, where the generator produces a large number of possible results 
and the selector chooses the appropriate subset.

Lazy evaluation is not without its costs. It would certainly be surprising if 
such expressive power and f lexibility were free. In this case, the cost is in a far 
more complicated semantics, which results in much slower speed of execution.

F# is a .NET functional programming language whose core is based on OCaml, 
which is a descendant of ML and Haskell. Although it is fundamentally a func-
tional language, it includes imperative features and supports object-oriented 
programming. One of the most important characteristics of F# is that it has 
a full-featured IDE, an extensive library of utilities that supports imperative, 
object-oriented, and functional programming, and has interoperability with a 
collection of nonfunctional languages (all of the .NET languages).

F# is a first-class .NET language. This means that F# programs can interact 
in every way with other .NET languages. For example, F# classes can be used 
and subclassed by programs in other languages, and vice versa. Furthermore, 
F# programs have access to all of the .NET Framework APIs. The F# imple-
mentation is available free from Microsoft (http://research.microsoft 
.com/fsharp/fsharp.aspx). It is also supported by Visual Studio.

F# includes a variety of data types. Among these are tuples, like those 
of Python and the functional languages ML and Haskell, lists, discriminated 
unions, an expansion of ML’s unions, and records, like those of ML, which 
are like tuples except the components are named. F# has both mutable and 
immutable arrays.

Recall from Chapter 6, that F#’s lists are similar to those of ML, except 
that the elements are separated by semicolons and hd and tl must be called as 
methods of List.

F# supports sequence values, which are types from the .NET namespace 
System.Collections.Generic.IEnumerable. In F#, sequences are abbre-
viated as seq<type>, where <type> indicates the type of the generic. For exam-
ple, the type seq<int> is a sequence of integer values. Sequence values can be 

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   663

1/9/18   6:22 PM

13.  This example appears in Hughes (1989).

 
 
 
 
664 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

created with generators and they can be iterated. The simplest sequences are 
generated with range expressions, as in the following example:

let x = seq {1..4};;

In the examples of F#, we assume that the interactive interpreter is used, which 
requires the two semicolons at the end of each statement. The expression above 
generates seq[1;  2;  3;  4]. (List and sequence elements are separated by 
semicolons.) The generation of a sequence is lazy; for example, the following 
defines y to be a very long sequence, but only the needed elements are gener-
ated. For display, only the first four are generated.

let y = seq {0..100000000};;
y;;
val it: seq<int> = seq[0; 1; 2; 3;...]

The first line above defines y; the second line requests that the value of y be 
displayed; the third is the output of the F# interactive interpreter.

The default step size for integer sequence definitions is 1, but it can be 
set by including it in the middle of the range specification, as in the following 
example:

seq {1..2..7};;

This generates seq [1; 3; 5; 7].

The values of a sequence can be iterated with a for-in construct, as in 

the following example:

let seq1 = seq {0..3..11};;
for value in seq1 do printfn ”value = %d” value;;

This produces the following:

value = 0
value = 3
value = 6
value = 9

Iterators can also be used to create sequences, as in the following example:

let cubes = seq {for i in 1..5 -> (i, i * i * i)};;

This generates the following list of tuples:

seq [(1, 1); (2, 8); (3, 27); (4, 64); (5, 125)]

This use of iterators to generate collections is a form of list comprehension.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   664

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.9  F# 

  665

Sequencing can also be used to generate lists and arrays, although in these 
cases the generation is not lazy. In fact, the primary difference between lists 
and sequences in F# is that sequences are lazy, and thus can be infinite, whereas 
lists are not lazy. Lists are in their entirety stored in memory. That is not the 
case with sequences.

The functions of F# are similar to those of ML and Haskell. If named, 
they are defined with let statements. If unnamed, which means technically 
they are lambda expressions, they are defined with the fun reserved word. The 
following lambda expression illustrates their syntax:

(fun  a b -> a / b)

Note that there is no difference between a name defined with let and a 

function without parameters defined with let.

Indentation is used to show the extent of a function definition. For example, 

consider the following function definition:

let f =
    let pi = 3.14159
    let twoPi = 2.0 * pi
    twoPi;;

Note that F#, like ML, does not coerce numeric values, so if this function 

used 2 in the second-last line, rather than 2.0, an error would be reported.

If a function is recursive, the reserved word rec must precede its name in 

its definition. Following is an F# version of factorial:

let rec factorial x =
    if x <= 1  then 1
    else n * factorial(n - 1)

Names defined in functions can be outscoped, which means they can be 
redefined, which ends their former scope. For example, we could have the 
following:

let x4 x =
    let x = x * x
    let x = x * x
    x;;

In this function, the first let in the body of the x4 function creates a new ver-
sion of x, defining it to have the value of the square of the parameter x. This 
terminates the scope of the parameter. So, the second let in the function body 
uses the new x in its right side and creates yet another version of x, thereby 
terminating the scope of the x created in the previous let.

There are two important functional operators in F#, pipeline (|>) and 
function composition (>>). The pipeline operator is a binary operator that 

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   665

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
666 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

sends the value of its left operand, which is an expression, to the last parameter 
of the function call, which is the right operand. It is used to chain together 
function calls while f lowing the data being processed to each call. Consider the 
following example code, which uses the high-order functions filter and map:

let myNums = [1; 2; 3; 4; 5]
let evensTimesFive = myNums
    |> List.filter (fun n -> n % 2 = 0)
    |> List.map (fun n -> 5 * n)

The evensTimesFive function begins with the list myNums, filters out the 
numbers that are not even with filter, and uses map to map a lambda expres-
sion that multiplies the numbers in a given list by five. The return value of 
evensTimesFive is [10; 20].

The function composition operator builds a function that applies its left 
operand to a given parameter, which is a function, and then passes the result 
returned from that function to its right operand, which is also a function. So, 
the F# expression (f  >>  g)x is equivalent to the mathematical expression 
g(f(x)).

Like ML, F# supports curried functions and partial evaluation. The ML 

example in Section 15.7 could be written in F# as follows:

let add a b = a + b;;
let add5 = add 5;;

Note that, unlike ML, the syntax of the formal parameter list in F# is the same 
for all functions, so all functions with more than one parameter can be curried.
F# is interesting for several reasons: First, it builds on the past functional 
languages as a functional language. Second, it supports virtually all program-
ming methodologies in widespread use today. Third, it is the first functional 
language that is designed for interoperability with other widely used languages. 
Fourth, it starts out with an elaborate and well-developed IDE and library of 
utility software with .NET and its framework.

15.10   Support for Functional Programming in Primarily  

Imperative Languages

Imperative programming languages have typically provided only limited sup-
port for functional programming. That limited support has resulted in little use 
of those languages for functional programming. The most important restric-
tion, related to functional programming, of imperative languages of the past 
was the lack of support for higher-order functions.

One  indication  of  the  increasing  interest  and  use  of  functional  pro-
gramming is the partial support for it that has begun to appear over the last 
decade in programming languages that are primarily imperative. For example, 

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   666

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
15.10  Support for Functional Programming in Primarily Imperative Languages  

  667

anonymous functions, which are like lambda expressions, are now part of JavaS-
cript, Python, Ruby, Java, and C#.

In JavaScript, named functions are defined with the following syntax:

function name (formal-parameters) {
 body
}

An anonymous function is defined in JavaScript with the same syntax, except 
that the name of the function is omitted.

In C#, a lambda expression is an instance of a delegate. They can be anony-
mous or named. An anonymous lambda expression is simpler than an anonymous 
method because methods must define their parameter types and return type, but 
lambda expressions use the C# inferencing process to avoid those necessities. 
The syntax of an unnamed lambda expression in C# is as follows:

parameter(s) => expression

If there is more than one parameter, they must be enclosed in parentheses. If 
there are no parameters, empty parentheses must appear in the place of the 
parameters. If the system cannot infer the types of the parameters, they can 
be preceded by type names. The type of the return value is never specified; it 
is always inferred by the context of the lambda expression. The expression is 
either a single expression or a compound statement enclosed in braces. Such a 
compound statement must include a return statement.

One common use of anonymous lambda expressions is as actual parameters 
to methods that are specified to take delegates as parameters. For example, C# 
has a collection of methods for arrays that perform searching operations. For 
example, the FindAll method finds all of the elements of an array that satisfy a 
given instance of a delegate that takes a parameter of the type of the array’s ele-
ments and returns a Boolean value. For example, we could have the following:

int[] numbers = {-3, 0, 4, 5, 1, 7, -3, -6, -9, 0, 3};
int[] positives = Array.FindAll(numbers, n => n > 0);
// Now, positives is {4, 5, 1, 7, 3}

Lambda expressions in C# can also be named. The language has generic 
delegates that make defining such lambda expressions simple, although they 
do not cover all possibilities. One commonly used generic delegate is Func, 
which can take up to sixteen generic parameters for the parameters of the 
lambda expression, plus one more for the return type. For example, consider 
the following example of a named lambda expression and an invocation of it:

Func<int, int, int> eval1 = (a, b) => 3 * a + (b / 2);
int result = eval1(6, 22);

C# lambda expressions can access variables defined outside their definitions. 
When they do, the lifetimes of the accessed external variables, which are called 

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   667

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
668 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

captured variables, are extended so that they still exist when the lambda expres-
sion is used. A lambda expression that captures outside variables is a closure.

Lambda expressions were added to Java 8. The general syntax of these 
expressions is like that of C#, except that -> is used instead of =>. The syntax 
of parameters, the inferencing of parameter types and the return type, and the 
expression or block with a return are the same as with C#. Prior to Java 8, 
there was no convenient way to pass a block of code to a method or have the 
method return a block of code.14

Python’s  lambda  expressions  define  simple  one-statement  anonymous 
functions. The syntax of a lambda expression in Python is exemplified by the 
following:

lambda a, b : 2 * a - b

Note that the formal parameters are separated from function body by a colon.
Python includes the higher-order functions filter and map. Both often 
use lambda expressions as their first parameter. The second parameter of these 
is a sequence type, and both return the same sequence type as their second 
parameter. In Python, strings, lists, and tuples are considered sequences. Con-
sider the following example of using the map function in Python:

map(lambda x: x ** 3, [2, 4, 6, 8])

This call returns [8, 64, 216, 512].

Python also supports partial function applications. Consider the following 

example:

from operator import add
add5 = partial (add, 5)

The from declaration here imports the functional version of the addition 

operator, which is named add, from the operator module.

After defining add5, it can be used with one parameter, as in the following:

add5(15)

This call returns 20.

As described in Chapter 6, Python includes lists and list comprehensions.
Ruby’s blocks are effectively subprograms that are sent to methods, which 
makes the method a higher-order subprogram. A Ruby block can be converted 
to a subprogram object with lambda. For example, consider the following:

times = lambda {|a, b| a * b}

14.  One inconvenient way was to define a class with a method that contained the code, instanti-

ate the class, and pass a reference to it.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   668

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
 
15.11  A Comparison of Functional and Imperative Languages 

  669

Following is an example of using times:

x = times.(3, 4)

This sets x to 12. The times object can be curried with the following:

times5 = times.curry.(5)

This function can be used as in the following:

x5 = times5.(3)

This sets x5 to 15.

15.11  A Comparison of Functional and Imperative Languages

This section discusses some of the differences between imperative and func-
tional languages.

Functional languages can have a very simple syntactic structure. The list 
structure of Lisp, which is used for both code and data, clearly illustrates this. 
The syntax of the imperative languages is much more complex. This makes 
them more difficult to learn and to use.

The semantics of  functional languages is also simpler than  that of the 
imperative languages. For example, in the denotational semantics description 
of an imperative loop construct given in Section 3.5.2, the loop is converted 
from an iterative construct to a recursive construct. This conversion is unneces-
sary in a pure functional language, in which there is no iteration. Furthermore, 
we assumed there were no expression side effects in all of the denotational 
semantic descriptions of imperative constructs in Chapter 3. This restriction 
is unrealistic for imperative languages, because all of the C-based languages 
include expression side effects. This restriction is not needed for the denota-
tional descriptions of pure functional languages.

Some in the functional programming community have claimed that the use 
of functional programming results in an order-of-magnitude increase in pro-
ductivity, largely due to functional programs being claimed to be only 10 per-
cent as large as their imperative counterparts. While such numbers have been 
actually shown for certain problem areas, for other problem areas, functional 
programs are more like 25 percent as large as imperative solutions to the same 
problems (Wadler, 1998). These factors allow proponents of functional pro-
gramming to claim productivity advantages over imperative programming of 
4 to 10 times. However, program size alone is not necessarily a good measure 
of productivity. Certainly not all lines of source code have equal complexity, 
nor do they take the same amount of time to produce. In fact, because of the 
necessity of dealing with variables, imperative programs have many trivially 
simple lines for initializing and making small changes to variables.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   669

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
670 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

Execution efficiency is another basis for comparison. When functional 
programs are interpreted, they are of course much slower than their compiled 
imperative counterparts. However, there are now compilers for most functional 
languages, so that execution speed disparities between functional languages and 
compiled imperative languages are no longer so great. One might be tempted 
to say that because functional programs are significantly smaller than equivalent 
imperative programs, they should execute much faster than the imperative pro-
grams. However, this often is not the case, because of a collection of language 
characteristics of the functional languages, such as lazy evaluation, that have a 
negative impact on execution efficiency. Considering the relative efficiency of 
functional and imperative programs, it is reasonable to estimate that an average 
functional program will execute in about twice the time of its imperative coun-
terpart (Wadler, 1998). This may sound like a significant difference, one that 
would often lead one to dismiss the functional languages for a given application. 
However, this factor-of-two difference is important only in situations where 
execution speed is of the utmost importance. There are many situations where 
a factor of two in execution speed is not considered important. For example, 
consider that many programs written in imperative languages, such as the Web 
software written in JavaScript and PHP, are interpreted and therefore are much 
slower than equivalent compiled versions. For these applications, execution 
speed is not the first priority.

Another source of the difference in execution efficiency between functional 
and imperative programs is the fact that imperative languages were designed 
to run efficiently on von Neumann architecture computers, while the design 
of functional languages is based on mathematical functions. This gives the 
imperative languages a large advantage.

Functional  languages  have  a  potential  advantage  in  readability.  In  many 
imperative programs, the details of dealing with variables obscure the logic of the 
program. Consider a function that computes the sum of the cubes of the first n 
positive integers. In C, such a function would likely appear similar to the following:

int sum_cubes(int  n){
  int sum = 0;
  for(int index = 1; index <= n; index++)
    sum += index * index * index;
  return sum;
}

In Haskell, the function could be:

sumCubes n = sum (map (^3) [1..n])

This version simply specifies three steps:

1.  Build the list of numbers ([1..n]).
2.  Create a new list by mapping a function that computes the cube of a 

number onto each number in the list.

3.  Sum the new list.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   670

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
Summary 

  671

Because of the lack of details of variables and iteration control, this version 

is more readable than the C version.15

Concurrent execution in the imperative languages is difficult to design and 
difficult to use, as we saw in Chapter 13. In an imperative language, the pro-
grammer must make a static division of the program into its concurrent parts, 
which are then written as tasks, whose execution often must be synchronized. 
This can be a complicated process. Programs in functional languages are natu-
rally divided into functions. In a pure functional language, these functions are 
independent in the sense that they do not create side effects and their opera-
tions do not depend on any nonlocal or global variables. Therefore, it is much 
easier to determine which of them can be concurrently executed. The actual 
parameter expressions in calls often can be evaluated concurrently. Simply by 
specifying that it can be done, a function can be implicitly evaluated in a sep-
arate thread, as in Multilisp. And, of course, access to shared immutable data 
does not require synchronization.

One simple factor that strongly affects the complexity of imperative, or 
procedural programming, is the necessary attention of the programmer to the 
state of the program at each step of its development. In a large program, the 
state of the program is a large number of values (for the large number of pro-
gram variables). In pure functional programming, there is no state; hence, no 
need to devote attention to keeping it in mind.

It is not a simple matter to determine precisely why functional languages 
have not attained greater popularity. The inefficiency of the early implementa-
tions was clearly a factor then, and it is likely that at least some contemporary 
imperative programmers still believe that programs written in functional lan-
guages are slow. In addition, the vast majority of programmers learn program-
ming using imperative languages, which makes functional programs appear to 
them to be strange and difficult to understand. For many who are comfort-
able with imperative programming, the switch to functional programming is 
an unattractive and potentially difficult move. On the other hand, those who 
begin with a functional language never notice anything strange about func-
tional programs.

S U M M A R Y

Mathematical functions are named or unnamed mappings that use only con-
ditional expressions and recursion to control their evaluations. Complex func-
tions can be defined using higher-order functions or functional forms, in which 
functions are used as parameters, returned values, or both.

Functional programming languages are modeled on mathematical func-
tions. In their pure form, they do not use variables or assignment statements to 

15.  Of course, the C version could have been written in a more functional style, but most C 

 programmers probably would not write it that way.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   671

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
672 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

produce results; rather, they use function applications, conditional expressions, 
and recursion for execution control and functional forms to construct complex 
functions. Lisp began as a purely functional language but soon acquired a num-
ber of imperative-language features added in order to increase its efficiency 
and ease of use.

The first version of Lisp grew out of the need for a list-processing lan-
guage for AI applications. Lisp is still the most widely used language for that 
application area.

The first implementation of Lisp was serendipitous: The original version 
of EVAL was developed solely to demonstrate that a universal Lisp function 
could be written.

Because Lisp data and Lisp programs have the same form, it is possible to 
have a program build another program. The availability of EVAL allows dynam-
ically constructed programs to be executed immediately.

Scheme is a relatively simple dialect of Lisp that uses static scoping exclu-
sively. Like Lisp, Scheme’s primary primitives include functions for construct-
ing and dismantling lists, functions for conditional expressions, and simple 
predicates for numbers, symbols, and lists.

Common Lisp is a Lisp-based language that was designed to include most 
of the features of the Lisp dialects of the early 1980s. It allows both static- and 
dynamic-scoped variables and includes many imperative features. Common 
Lisp uses macros to define some of its functions. Users are allowed to define 
their own macros. The language includes reader macros, which are also user 
definable. Reader macros define single-symbol macros.

ML is a static-scoped and strongly typed functional programming language 
that uses a syntax that is more closely related to that of an imperative language 
than to Lisp. It includes a type-inferencing system, exception handling, a vari-
ety of data structures, and abstract data types.

ML does not do any type coercions and does not allow function overload-
ing. Multiple definitions of functions can be defined using pattern matching of 
the actual parameter form. Currying is the process of replacing a function that 
takes multiple parameters with one that takes a single parameter and returns a 
function that takes the other parameters. ML, as well as several other functional 
languages, supports currying.

Haskell is similar to ML, except that all expressions in Haskell are eval-
uated using a lazy method, which allows programs to deal with infinite lists. 
Haskell also supports list comprehensions, which provide a convenient and 
familiar syntax for describing sets. Unlike ML and Scheme, Haskell is a pure 
functional language.

F# is a .NET programming language that supports functional and imper-
ative programming, including object-oriented programming. Its functional 
programming core is based on OCaml, a descendent of ML and Haskell. F# is 
supported by an elaborate and widely used IDE. It also interoperates with other 
.NET languages and has access to the .NET class library.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   672

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
B I B L I O G R A P H I C   N O T E S

Review Questions 

  673

The first published version of Lisp can be found in McCarthy (1960). A widely 
used version from the mid-1960s until the late 1970s is described in McCarthy 
et al. (1965) and Weissman (1967). Common Lisp is described in Steele (1990). 
The Scheme language is described in Dybvig (2011). ML is defined in Milner 
et al. (1997). Ullman (1998) is an excellent introductory textbook for ML. 
Programming in Haskell is introduced in Thompson (1999). F# is described 
in Syme et al. (2010).

The Scheme programs in this chapter were developed using DrRacket’s 

legacy language R5RS.

A rigorous discussion of functional programming in general can be found 
in  Henderson  (1980).  The  process  of  implementing  functional  languages 
through graph reduction is discussed in detail in Peyton Jones (1987).

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  Define functional form, simple list, bound variable, and referential transparency.
2.  What does a lambda expression specify?

3.  What data types were parts of the original Lisp?

4.  In what common data structure are Lisp lists normally stored?

5.  Explain why QUOTE is needed for a parameter that is a data list.

6.  What is a simple list?

7.  What does the abbreviation REPL stand for?

8.  What are the three parameters to IF?

9.  What are the differences between =, EQ?, EQV?, and EQUAL?

10.  What are the differences between the evaluation method used for the 
Scheme special form DEFINE and that used for its primitive functions?

11.  What are the two forms of DEFINE?

12.  Describe the syntax and semantics of COND.

13.  Why are CAR and CDR so named?

14.  If CONS is called with two atoms, say 'A and 'B, what is the returned?

15.  Describe the syntax and semantics of LET in Scheme.

16.  What are the differences between CONS, LIST, and APPEND?

17.  Describe the syntax and semantics of mapcar in Scheme.

18.  What is tail recursion? Why is it important to define functions that use 

recursion to specify repetition to be tail recursive?

19.  Why were imperative features added to most dialects of Lisp?

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   673

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
674 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

20.  In what ways are Common Lisp and Scheme opposites?

21.  What scoping rule is used in Scheme? In Common Lisp? In ML? In 

Haskell? In F#?

22.  What happens during the reader phase of a Common Lisp language 

processor?

23.  What are two ways that ML is fundamentally different from Scheme?

24.  What is stored in an ML evaluation environment?

25.  What is the difference between an ML val statement and an assignment 

statement in C?

26.  What is type inferencing, as used in ML?
27.  What is the use of the fn reserved word in ML?

28.  Can ML functions that deal with scalar numerics be generic?

29.  What is a curried function?

30.  What does partial evaluation mean?

31.  Describe the actions of the ML filter function.

32.  What operator does ML use for Scheme’s CAR?

33.  What operator does ML use for functional composition?

34.  What are the three characteristics of Haskell that make it different from ML?

35.  What does lazy evaluation mean?

36.  What is a strict programming language?

37.  What programming paradigms are supported by F#?

38.  With what other programming languages can F# interoperate?

39.  What does F#’s let do?

40.  How is the scope of a F# let construct terminated?

41.  What is the underlying difference between a sequence and a list in F#?

42.  What is the difference between the let of ML and that of F#, in terms of 

extent?

43.  What is the syntax of a lambda expression in F#?

44.  Does F# coerce numeric values in expressions? Argue in support of the 

design choice.

45.  What support does Python provide for functional programming?

46.  What function in Ruby is used to create a curried function?

47.  Is the use of functional programming expanding or shrinking?

48.  What is one characteristic of functional programming languages that 
makes their semantics simpler than that of imperative languages?
49.  What is the f law in using lines of code to compare the productivity of 

functional languages and that of imperative languages?

50.  Why can concurrency be easier with functional languages than 

imperative languages?

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   674

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
P R O B L E M   S E T

Problem Set 

  675

1.  Read John Backus’s paper on FP (Backus, 1978) and compare the 

features of Scheme discussed in this chapter with the corresponding 
features of FP.

2.  Find definitions of the Scheme functions EVAL and APPLY, and explain 

their actions.

3.  One of the most modern and complete programming environments is 
the INTERLISP system for Lisp, as described in “The INTERLISP 
Programming Environment,” by Teitelmen and Masinter (IEEE Computer, 
Vol. 14, No. 4, April 1981). Read this article carefully and compare the 
difficulty of writing Lisp programs on your system with that of using 
INTERLISP (assuming that you do not normally use INTERLISP).
4.  Refer to a book on Lisp programming and determine what arguments 

support the inclusion of the PROG feature in Lisp.

5.  Find at least one example of a typed functional programming language 
being used to build a commercial system in each of the following 
areas: database processing, financial modeling, statistical analysis, and 
bioinformatics.

6.  A functional language could use some data structure other than the list. 
For example, it could use strings of single-character symbols. What 
primitives would such a language have in place of the CAR, CDR, and CONS 
primitives of Scheme?

7.  Make a list of the features of F# that are not in ML.

8.  If Scheme were a pure functional language, could it include DISPLAY? 

Why or why not?

9.  What does the following Scheme function do?

(define (y s lis)
  (cond
    ((null? lis) '() )
    ((equal? s (car lis)) lis)
    (else (y s (cdr lis)))
))

10.  What does the following Scheme function do?

(define (x lis)
  (cond
    ((null? lis) 0)
    ((not (list? (car lis)))
       (cond
         ((eq? (car lis) #f) (x (cdr lis)))
         (else (+ 1 (x (cdr lis))))))
    (else (+ (x (car lis)) (x (cdr lis))))

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   675

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
676 

  Chapter 15 

 Functional Programming Languages

P R O G R A M M I N G   E X E R C I S E S

1.  Write a Scheme function that computes the volume of a sphere, given its 

radius.

2.  Write a Scheme function that computes the real roots of a given 

quadratic equation. If the roots are complex, the function must display 
a message indicating that. This function must use an IF function. 
The three parameters to the function are the three coefficients of the 
quadratic equation.

3.  Repeat Programming Exercise 2 using a COND function, rather than an 

IF function.

4.  Write a Scheme function that takes two numeric parameters, A and B, 

and returns A raised to the B power.

5.  Write a Scheme function that returns the number of zeros in a given 

simple list of numbers.

6.  Write a Scheme function that takes a simple list of numbers as a parameter 
and returns a list with the largest and smallest numbers in the input list.

7.  Write a Scheme function that takes a list and an atom as parameters 

and returns a list identical to its parameter list except with all top-level 
instances of the given atom deleted.

8.  Write a Scheme function that takes a list as a parameter and returns a list 

identical to the parameter except the last element has been deleted.

9.  Repeat Programming Exercise 7, except that the atom can be either an 

atom or a list.

10.  Write a Scheme function that takes two atoms and a list as parameters 

and returns a list identical to the parameter list except all occurrences of 
the first given atom in the list are replaced with the second given atom, 
no matter how deeply the first atom is nested.

11.  Write a Scheme function that returns the reverse of its simple list parameter.

12.  Write a Scheme predicate function that tests for the structural equality 
of two given lists. Two lists are structurally equal if they have the same 
list structure, although their atoms may be different.

13.  Write a Scheme function that returns the union of two simple list 

parameters that represent sets.

14.  Write a Scheme function with two parameters, an atom and a list, that 
returns a list identical to the parameter list except with all occurrences, 
no matter how deep, of the given atom deleted. The returned list cannot 
contain anything in place of the deleted atoms.

15.  Write a Scheme function that takes a list as a parameter and returns a list 

identical to the parameter list except with the second top-level element 
removed. If the given list does not have two elements, the function 
should return ().

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   676

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
 
Programming Exercises 

  677

16.  Write a Scheme function that takes a simple list of numbers as its 

parameter and returns a list identical to the parameter list except with 
the numbers in ascending order.

17.  Write a Scheme function that takes a simple list of numbers as its 
parameter and returns the largest and smallest numbers in the list.

18.  Write a Scheme function that takes a simple list as its parameter and 

returns a list of all permutations of the given list.

19.  Write the quicksort algorithm in Scheme.

20.  Rewrite the following Scheme function as a tail-recursive function:

(DEFINE (doit n)
  (IF (= n 0)
    0
    (+ n (doit (- n 1)))
))

21.  Write any of the first 19 Programming Exercises in F#.

22.  Write any of the first 19 Programming Exercises in ML.

M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   677

1/9/18   6:22 PM

 
 
 
M15_SEBE8029_12_SE_C15.indd   678

1/9/18   6:22 PM
