# Fuente
- archivo: 703-784.pdf
- ruta: /home/matiasgel/Documentos/paradigmas2026/ingesta/Robert W. Sebesta - Concepts of Programming Languages-Pearson (2019)/703-784.pdf
- extraido: 2026-03-26T16:13:37

# Contenido

16 

Logic Programming 
Languages

 16.1  Introduction

 16.2  A Brief Introduction to Predicate Calculus

 16.3  Predicate Calculus and Proving Theorems

 16.4  An Overview of Logic Programming

 16.5  The Origins of Prolog

 16.6  The Basic Elements of Prolog

 16.7  Deficiencies of Prolog

 16.8  Applications of Logic Programming

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   679

1/5/18   11:06 PM

679

680 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

T he objectives of this chapter are to introduce the concepts of logic programming 

and logic programming languages, including a brief description of a subset of 
Prolog. We begin with an introduction to predicate calculus, which is the basis 
for logic programming languages. This is followed by a discussion of how predicate 
 calculus can be used for automatic theorem-proving systems. Then, we present a 
 general overview of logic programming. Next, a lengthy section introduces the basics 
of the Prolog programming language, including arithmetic, list processing, and a trace 
tool that can be used to help debug programs and also to illustrate how the Prolog 
system works. The final two sections describe some of the problems of Prolog as a logic 
language and some of the application areas in which Prolog has been used.

16.1  Introduction

Chapter 15 discusses the functional programming paradigm, which is sig-
nificantly different from the software development methodologies used with 
the imperative languages. In this chapter, we describe another different pro-
gramming methodology. In this case, the approach is to express programs 
in a form of symbolic logic and use a logical inferencing process to produce 
results. Logic programs are declarative rather than procedural, which means 
that only the specifications of the desired results are stated rather than detailed 
procedures for producing them. Programs in logic programming languages are 
collections of facts and rules. Such a program is used by asking it questions, 
which it attempts to answer by consulting the facts and rules. “Consulting” is 
perhaps misleading here, for the process is far more complex than that word 
connotes. This approach to problem solving may sound like it addresses only 
a very narrow category of problems, but it is more f lexible than might be 
thought.

Programming that uses a form of symbolic logic as a programming lan-
guage is often called logic programming, and languages based on symbolic 
logic are called logic programming languages, or declarative languages. We 
have chosen to describe the logic programming language Prolog, because it is 
the only widely used logic language.

The syntax of logic programming languages is remarkably different from 
that of the imperative and functional languages. The semantics of logic pro-
grams also bears little resemblance to that of imperative-language programs. 
These observations should lead the reader to some curiosity about the nature 
of logic programming and declarative languages.

16.2  A Brief Introduction to Predicate Calculus

Before we can discuss logic programming, we must brief ly investigate its basis, 
which is formal logic. This is not our first contact with formal logic in this text; 
it was used extensively in the axiomatic semantics described in Chapter 3.

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   680

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
16.2  A Brief Introduction to Predicate Calculus 

  681

A proposition can be thought of as a logical statement that may or may 
not be true. It consists of objects and the relationships among objects. Formal 
logic was developed to provide a method for describing propositions, with the 
goal of allowing those formally stated propositions to be checked for validity.

Symbolic logic can be used for the three basic needs of formal logic: to 
express propositions, to express the relationships between propositions, and to 
describe how new propositions can be inferred from other propositions that 
are assumed to be true.

There is a close relationship between formal logic and mathematics. In 
fact, much of mathematics can be thought of in terms of logic. The fundamen-
tal axioms of number and set theory are the initial set of propositions, which 
are assumed to be true. Theorems are the additional propositions that can be 
inferred from the initial set.

The particular form of symbolic logic that is used for logic programming 
is called first-order  predicate  calculus (though it is a bit imprecise, we 
will usually refer to it as predicate calculus). In the following subsections, we 
present a brief look at predicate calculus. Our goal is to lay the groundwork 
for a discussion of logic programming and the logic programming language 
Prolog.

16.2.1  Propositions

The  objects  in  logic  programming  propositions  are  represented  by  simple 
terms, which are either constants or variables. A constant is a symbol that rep-
resents an object. A variable is a symbol that can represent different objects at 
different times, although in a sense that is far closer to mathematics than the 
variables in an imperative programming language.

The simplest propositions, which are called atomic propositions, consist 
of compound terms. A compound term is one element of a mathematical 
relation, written in a form that has the appearance of mathematical function 
notation. Recall from Chapter 15 that a mathematical function is a mapping, 
which can be represented either as an expression or as a table or list of tuples. 
Compound terms are elements of the tabular definition of a function.

A compound term is composed of two parts: a functor, which is the func-
tion symbol that names the relation, and an ordered list of parameters, which 
together represent an element of the relation. A compound term with a single 
parameter is a 1-tuple; one with two parameters is a 2-tuple, and so forth. For 
example, we might have the two propositions

man(jake)
like(bob, steak)

which state that {jake} is a 1-tuple in the relation named man, and that {bob, 
steak} is a 2-tuple in the relation named like. If we added the proposition

man(fred)

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   681

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
682 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

to the two previous propositions, then the relation man would have two distinct 
elements, {jake} and {fred}. All of the simple terms in these propositions—man, 
jake, like, bob, and steak—are constants. Note that these propositions have no 
intrinsic semantics. They mean whatever we want them to mean. For example, 
the second example may mean that bob likes steak, or that steak likes bob, or 
that bob is in some way similar to a steak.

Propositions can be stated in two modes: one in which the proposition is 
defined to be true, and one in which the truth of the proposition is something 
that is to be determined. In other words, propositions either can be facts or 
queries. The example propositions above could be either.

Compound propositions have two or more atomic propositions, which 
are connected by logical connectors, or operators, in the same way com-
pound logic expressions are constructed in imperative languages. The names, 
symbols, and meanings of the predicate calculus logical connectors are as 
follows:

Name

Symbol

Example

Meaning

negation
conjunction
disjunction
equivalence
implication

⫎
x
h

K
⊃
⊂

⫎ a
a x b
a h b
a  K  b
a  ⊃  b
a  ⊂  b

not a
a and b
a or b
a is equivalent to b
a implies b
b implies a

The following are examples of compound propositions:

 a x b  ⊃  c
 a x ⫎ b  ⊃  d

The ⫎ operator has the highest precedence. The operators  x, h, and  K  
all have higher precedence than  ⊃  and  ⊂ . So, the second example above is 
equivalent to

(a x (⫎ b))  ⊃  d

Variables can appear in propositions but only when introduced by spe-
cial symbols called quantifiers. Predicate calculus includes two quantifiers, as 
described below, where X is a variable and P is a proposition:

Name

universal
existential

Example
5 X.P
E X.P

Meaning

For all X, P is true.
There exists a value of X such 
that P is true.

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   682

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
16.2  A Brief Introduction to Predicate Calculus 

  683

The period between X and P simply separates the variable from the proposi-
tion. For example, consider the following:

5X. (woman (X)  ⊃  human (X))
EX. (mother (mary, X) x  male (X))

The first of these propositions means that for any value of X, if X is a woman, 
then X is a human. The second means that there exists a value of X such that 
mary is the mother of X and X is a male; in other words, mary has a son. The 
scope of the universal and existential quantifiers is the atomic propositions to 
which they are attached. This scope can be extended using parentheses, as in 
the two compound propositions just described. So, the universal and existential 
quantifiers have higher precedence than any of the operators.

16.2.2  Clausal Form

We are discussing predicate calculus because it is the basis for logic program-
ming languages. As with other languages, logic languages are best in their 
simplest form, meaning that redundancy should be minimized.

One problem with predicate calculus as we have described it thus far is that 
there are too many different ways of stating propositions that have the same 
meaning; that is, there is a great deal of redundancy. This is not such a problem 
for logicians, but if predicate calculus is to be used in an automated (comput-
erized) system, it is a serious problem. To simplify matters, a standard form 
for propositions is desirable. Clausal form, which is a relatively simple form of 
propositions, is one such standard form. All propositions can be expressed in 
clausal form. A proposition in clausal form has the following general syntax:

B1 h B2 h  c h Bn  ⊂  A1 x A2 x  c x Am

in which the A’s and B’s are terms. The meaning of this clausal form propo-
sition is as follows: If all of the A’s are true, then at least one B is true. The 
primary characteristics of clausal form propositions are the following: Existen-
tial quantifiers are not required; universal quantifiers are implicit in the use of 
variables in the atomic propositions; and no operators other than conjunction 
and disjunction are required. Also, conjunction and disjunction need appear 
only in the order shown in the general clausal form: disjunction on the left side 
and conjunction on the right side. All predicate calculus propositions can be 
algorithmically converted to clausal form. Nilsson (1971) gives proof that this 
can be done, as well as a simple conversion algorithm for doing it.

The right side of a clausal form proposition is called the antecedent. The 
left side is called the consequent because it is the consequence of the truth of 
the antecedent. As examples of clausal form propositions, consider the following:

likes (bob, trout)  ⊂  likes (bob, fish) x  fish (trout)

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   683

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
684 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

father (louis, al) h  father (louis, violet)  ⊂

father (al, bob) x mother (violet, bob) x grandfather (louis, bob)

The English version of the first of these states that if bob likes fish and a trout 
is a fish, then bob likes trout. The second states that if al is bob’s father and 
violet is bob’s mother and louis is bob’s grandfather, then louis is either al’s 
father or violet’s father.

16.3  Predicate Calculus and Proving Theorems

Predicate calculus provides a method of expressing collections of propositions. 
One use of collections of propositions is to determine whether any interesting 
or useful facts can be inferred from them. This is exactly analogous to the work 
of mathematicians, who strive to discover new theorems that can be inferred 
from known axioms and theorems.

The early days of computer science (the 1950s and early 1960s) saw a great 
deal of interest in automating the theorem-proving process. One of the most 
significant breakthroughs in automatic theorem proving was the discovery of 
the resolution principle by Alan Robinson (1965) at Syracuse University.

Resolution is an inference rule that allows inferred propositions to be 
computed from given propositions, thus providing a method with potential 
application to automatic theorem proving. Resolution was devised to be applied 
to propositions in clausal form. The concept of resolution is the following: 
Suppose there are two propositions with the forms

 P1  ⊂  P2
 Q1  ⊂  Q2

Their meaning is that P2 implies P1 and Q2 implies Q1. Furthermore, suppose 
that P1 is identical to Q2, so that we could rename P1 and Q2 as T. Then, we 
could rewrite the two propositions as

 T  ⊂  P2
 Q1  ⊂  T

Now, because P2 implies T and T implies Q1, it is logically obvious that P2 
implies Q1, which we could write as

Q1  ⊂  P2

The process of inferring this proposition from the original two propositions 
is resolution.

As another example, consider the two propositions:

older (joanne, jake)  ⊂  mother (joanne, jake)
wiser (joanne, jake)  ⊂  older (joanne, jake)

From these propositions, the following proposition can be constructed using 
resolution:

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   684

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
16.3  Predicate Calculus and Proving Theorems 

  685

wiser(joanne, jake) ⊂  mother(joanne, jake)

The mechanics of this resolution construction are simple: The terms of the 
left sides of the two clausal propositions are OR’d together to make the left side 
of the new proposition. Then the right sides of the two clausal propositions are 
AND’d together to get the right side of the new proposition. Next, any term 
that appears on both sides of the new proposition is removed from both sides. 
The process is exactly the same when the propositions have multiple terms 
on either or both sides. The left side of the new inferred proposition initially 
contains all of the terms of the left sides of the two given propositions. The new 
right side is similarly constructed. Then the term that appears on both sides of 
the new proposition is removed. For example, if we have

father(bob, jake)h  mother(bob, jake) ⊂  parent(bob, jake)
grandfather(bob, fred) ⊂  father(bob, jake)x  father(jake, fred)

resolution says that

mother(bob, jake)h  grandfather(bob, fred) ⊂
         parent(bob, jake)x  father(jake, fred)

which has all but one of the atomic propositions of both of the original prop-
ositions. The one atomic proposition that allowed the operation father (bob, 
jake) in the left side of the first and in the right side of the second is left out. 
In English, we would say

if:

and:

then:

bob is the parent of jake implies that bob is either the father or 
mother of jake
bob is the father of jake and jake is the father of fred implies that bob 
is the grandfather of fred
if bob is the parent of jake and jake is the father of fred then: either 
bob is jake’s mother or bob is fred’s grandfather

Resolution is actually more complex than these simple examples illustrate. 
In particular, the presence of variables in propositions requires resolution to 
find values for those variables that allow the matching process to succeed. This 
process of determining useful values for variables is called unification. The tem-
porary assigning of values to variables to allow unification is called instantiation.
It is common for the resolution process to instantiate a variable with a 
value, fail to complete the required matching, and then be required to backtrack 
and instantiate the variable with a different value. We will discuss unification 
and backtracking more extensively in the context of Prolog.

A critically important property of resolution is its ability to detect any 
inconsistency in a given set of propositions. This is based on the formal prop-
erty of resolution called refutation complete. What this means is that given a 
set of inconsistent propositions, resolution can prove them to be inconsistent. 
This allows resolution to be used to prove theorems, which can be done as 

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   685

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
686 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

follows: We can envision a theorem proof in terms of predicate calculus as 
a given set of pertinent propositions, with the negation of the theorem itself 
stated as a new proposition. The theorem is negated so that resolution can be 
used to prove the theorem by finding an inconsistency. This is proof by con-
tradiction, a frequently used approach to proving theorems in mathematics. 
Typically, the original propositions are called the hypotheses, and the negation 
of the theorem is called the goal.

Theoretically, this process is valid and useful. The time required for reso-
lution, however, can be a problem. Although resolution is a finite process when 
the set of propositions is finite, the time required to find an inconsistency in a 
large database of propositions may be huge.

Theorem proving is the basis for logic programming. Much of what is 
computed can be couched in the form of a list of given facts and relationships 
as hypotheses, and a goal to be inferred from the hypotheses, using resolution.
Resolution on a hypotheses and a goal that are general propositions, even 
if they are in clausal form, is often not practical. Although it may be possible 
to prove a theorem using clausal form propositions, it may not happen in a 
reasonable amount of time. One way to simplify the resolution process is to 
restrict the form of the propositions. One useful restriction is to require the 
propositions to be Horn clauses. Horn clauses only can be in one of two forms: 
They have either a single atomic proposition on the left side or an empty left 
side.1 The left side of a clausal form proposition is sometimes called the head, 
and Horn clauses with left sides are called headed Horn clauses. Headed Horn 
clauses are used to state relationships, such as

likes(bob, trout)  ⊂  likes(bob, fish) x  fish(trout)

Horn clauses with empty left sides, which are often used to state facts, are 

called headless Horn clauses. For example,

father(bob, jake)

Most, but not all, propositions can be stated as Horn clauses. The restric-
tion to Horn clauses makes resolution a practical process for proving theorems.

16.4  An Overview of Logic Programming

Languages used for logic programming are called declarative languages, because 
programs written in them consist of declarations rather than assignments and 
control f low statements. These declarations are actually statements, or propo-
sitions, in symbolic logic.

One of the essential characteristics of logic programming languages is their 
semantics, which is called declarative semantics. The basic concept of this 
semantics is that there is a simple way to determine the meaning of each state-
ment, and it does not depend on how the statement might be used to solve a 

1.  Horn clauses are named after Alfred Horn (1951), who studied clauses in this form.

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   686

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
 
16.4  An Overview of Logic Programming 

  687

problem. Declarative semantics is considerably simpler than the semantics of 
the imperative languages. For example, the meaning of a given proposition in a 
logic programming language can be concisely determined from the statement 
itself. In an imperative language, the semantics of a simple assignment statement 
requires examination of local declarations, knowledge of the scoping rules of the 
language, and possibly even examination of programs in other files just to deter-
mine the types of the variables in the assignment statement. Then, assuming the 
expression of the assignment contains variables, the execution of the program 
prior to the assignment statement must be traced to determine the values of those 
variables. The resulting action of the statement, then, depends on its run-time 
context. Comparing this semantics with that of a proposition in a logic language, 
with no need to consider textual context or execution sequences, it is clear that 
declarative semantics is far simpler than the semantics of imperative languages. 
Thus, declarative semantics is often stated as one of the advantages that declar-
ative languages have over imperative languages (Hogger, 1984, pp. 240–241).

Programming in both imperative and functional languages is primarily 
procedural, which means that the programmer knows what is to be accom-
plished by a program and instructs the computer on exactly how the computa-
tion is to be done. In other words, the computer is treated as a simple device 
that obeys orders. Everything that is computed must have every detail of that 
computation spelled out. Some believe that this is the essence of the difficulty 
of programming using imperative and functional languages.

Programming in a logic programming language is nonprocedural. Programs 
in such languages do not state exactly how a result is to be computed but rather 
describe the form of the result. The difference is that we assume the computer 
system can somehow determine how the result is to be computed. What is needed 
to provide this capability for logic programming languages is a concise means 
of supplying the computer with both the relevant information and a method 
of inference for computing desired results. Predicate calculus supplies the basic 
form of communication to the computer, and resolution provides the inference 
technique.

Sorting is commonly used to illustrate the difference between procedural 
and nonprocedural systems. In a language like Java, sorting is done by explain-
ing in a Java program all of the details of some sorting algorithm to a computer 
that has a Java compiler. The computer, after translating the Java program into 
machine code or some interpretive intermediate code, follows the instructions 
and produces the sorted list.

In a nonprocedural language, it is necessary only to describe the character-
istics of the sorted list: It is some permutation of the given list such that for each 
pair of adjacent elements, a given relationship holds between the two elements. 
To state this formally, suppose the list to be sorted is in an array named list that 
has a subscript range 1 . . . n. The concept of sorting the elements of the given 
list, named old_list, and placing them in a separate array, named new_list, can 
then be expressed as follows:

sort(old_list, new_list) ⊂  permute(old_list, new_list) x  sorted(new_list)
sorted (list)  ⊂ 5j such that 11 … j 6 n, list(j) … list(j + 1)

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   687

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
688 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

where permute is a predicate that returns true if its second parameter array is 
a permutation of its first parameter array.

From  this  description,  the  nonprocedural  language  system  could  pro-
duce the sorted list. That makes nonprocedural programming sound like the 
mere production of concise software requirements specifications, which is a 
fair assessment. Unfortunately, however, it is not that simple. Logic programs 
that use only resolution face serious problems of execution efficiency. In our 
example of sorting, if the list is long, the number of permutations is huge, and 
they must be generated and tested, one by one, until the one that is in order 
is found—a very lengthy process. Of course, one must consider the possibility 
that the best form of a logic language may not yet have been determined, and 
good methods of creating programs in logic programming languages for large 
problems have not yet been developed.

16.5  The Origins of Prolog

As was stated in Chapter 2, Alain Colmerauer and Phillippe Roussel at the 
University of Aix-Marseille, with some assistance from Robert Kowalski at the 
University of Edinburgh, developed the fundamental design of Prolog. Col-
merauer and Roussel were interested in natural-language processing; Kowalski 
was interested in automated theorem proving. The collaboration between the 
University of Aix-Marseille and the University of Edinburgh continued until 
the mid-1970s. Since then, research on the development and use of the lan-
guage has progressed independently at those two locations, resulting in, among 
other things, two syntactically different dialects of Prolog.

The development of Prolog and other research efforts in logic program-
ming received limited attention outside of Edinburgh and Marseille until the 
announcement in 1981 that the Japanese government was launching a large 
research  project  called  the  Fifth  Generation  Computing  Systems  (FGCS; 
Fuchi, 1981; Moto-oka, 1981). One of the primary objectives of the project 
was to develop intelligent machines, and Prolog was chosen as the basis for this 
effort. The announcement of FGCS aroused a sudden strong interest in arti-
ficial intelligence and logic programming in researchers and the governments 
of the United States and several European countries.

After a decade of effort, the FGCS project was quietly dropped. Despite 
the great assumed potential of logic programming and Prolog, little of great 
significance had been discovered. This led to the decline in the interest in and 
use of Prolog, although it still has its proponents.

16.6  The Basic Elements of Prolog

There are now a number of different dialects of Prolog. These can be grouped 
into several categories: those that grew from the Marseille group, those that 
came from the Edinburgh group, and some dialects that have been developed 

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   688

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
16.6  The Basic Elements of Prolog 

  689

for microcomputers, such as micro-Prolog, which is described by Clark and 
McCabe (1984). The syntactic forms of these are somewhat different. Rather 
than attempt to describe the syntax of several dialects of Prolog or some hybrid 
of them, we have chosen one particular, widely available dialect, which is the 
one developed at Edinburgh. This form of the language is sometimes called 
Edinburgh syntax. Its first implementation was on a DEC System-10 (Warren 
et al., 1979). Prolog implementations are available for virtually all popular com-
puter platforms, for example, from the Free Software Organization (http://
www.gnu.org).

16.6.1  Terms

As with programs in other languages, Prolog programs consist of collections 
of statements. There are only a few kinds of statements in Prolog, but they 
can be complex. All Prolog statements, as well as Prolog data, are constructed 
from terms.

A Prolog term is a constant, a variable, or a structure. A constant is either 
an atom or an integer. Atoms are the symbolic values of Prolog and are similar 
to their counterparts in LISP. In particular, an atom is either a string of letters, 
digits, and underscores that begins with a lowercase letter or a string of any 
printable ASCII characters delimited by apostrophes.

A variable is any string of letters, digits, and underscores that begins with 
an uppercase letter or an underscore ( _ ). Variables are not bound to types by 
declarations. The binding of a value, and thus a type, to a variable is called an 
instantiation. Instantiation occurs only in the resolution process. A variable 
that has not been assigned a value is called uninstantiated. Instantiations last 
only as long as it takes to satisfy one complete goal, which involves the proof 
or disproof of one proposition. Prolog variables are only distant relatives, in 
terms of both semantics and use, to the variables in the imperative languages.
The last kind of term is called a structure. Structures represent the atomic 

propositions of predicate calculus, and their general form is the same:

functor(parameter list)

The functor is any atom and is used to identify the structure. The parameter list 
can be any list of atoms, variables, or other structures. As discussed at length in 
the following subsection, structures are the means of specifying facts in Prolog. 
They can also be thought of as objects, in which case they allow facts to be 
stated in terms of several related atoms. In this sense, structures are relations, 
for they state relationships among terms. A structure is also a predicate when 
its context specifies it to be a query (question).

16.6.2  Fact Statements

Our discussion of Prolog statements begins with those statements used to con-
struct the hypotheses, or database of assumed information—the statements 
from which new information can be inferred.

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   689

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
690 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

Prolog has two basic statement forms; these correspond to the headless and 
headed Horn clauses of predicate calculus. The simplest form of headless Horn 
clause in Prolog is a single structure, which is interpreted as an unconditional 
assertion, or fact. Logically, facts are simply propositions that are assumed to 
be true.

The following examples illustrate the kinds of facts one can have in a Pro-

log program. Notice that every Prolog statement is terminated by a period.

female(shelley).
male(bill).
female(mary).
male(jake).
father(bill, jake).
father(bill, shelley).
mother(mary, jake).
mother(mary, shelley).

These simple structures state certain facts about jake, shelley, bill, and 
mary. For example, the first states that shelley is a female. The last four 
connect their two parameters with a relationship that is named in the functor 
atom; for example, the fifth proposition might be interpreted to mean that 
bill is the father of jake. Note that these Prolog propositions, like those 
of predicate calculus, have no intrinsic semantics. They mean whatever the 
programmer wants them to mean. For example, the proposition

father(bill, jake).

could mean bill and jake have the same father or that jake is the father 
of bill. The most common and straightforward meaning, however, might be 
that bill is the father of jake.

16.6.3  Rule Statements

The other basic form of Prolog statement for constructing the database cor-
responds to a headed Horn clause. This form can be related to a known theo-
rem in mathematics from which a conclusion can be drawn if the set of given 
conditions is satisfied. The right side is the antecedent, or if part, and the left 
side is the consequent, or then part. If the antecedent of a Prolog statement is 
true, then the consequent of the statement must also be true. Because they are 
Horn clauses, the consequent of a Prolog statement is a single term, while the 
antecedent can be either a single term or a conjunction.

Conjunctions contain multiple terms that are separated by logical AND 
operations. In Prolog, the AND operation is implied. The structures that spec-
ify atomic propositions in a conjunction are separated by commas, so one could 
consider the commas to be AND operators. As an example of a conjunction, 
consider the following:

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   690

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
16.6  The Basic Elements of Prolog 

  691

female(shelley), child(shelley).

The general form of the Prolog headed Horn clause statement is

consequence :- antecedent_expression.

It is read as follows: “consequence can be concluded if the antecedent expres-
sion is true or can be made to be true by some instantiation of its variables.” 
For example,

ancestor(mary, shelley) :- mother(mary, shelley).

states that if mary is the mother of shelley, then mary is an ancestor of 
shelley. Headed Horn clauses are called rules, because they state rules of 
implication between propositions.

As with clausal form propositions in predicate calculus, Prolog statements 
can use variables to generalize their meaning. Recall that variables in clausal 
form provide a kind of implied universal quantifier. The following demon-
strates the use of variables in Prolog statements:

parent(X, Y) :- mother(X, Y).
parent(X, Y) :- father(X, Y).
grandparent(X, Z) :- parent(X, Y) , parent(Y, Z).

These statements give rules of implication among some variables, or universal 
objects. In this case, the universal objects are X, Y, and Z. The first rule states 
that if there are instantiations of X and Y such that mother(X, Y) is true, then 
for those same instantiations of X and Y, parent(X, Y) is true.

The = operator, which is an infix operator, succeeds if its two term oper-
ands are the same. For example, X  =  Y. The not operator, which is a unary 
operator, reverses its operand, in the sense that it succeeds if its operand fails. 
For example, not(X = Y) succeeds if X is not equal to Y.

16.6.4  Goal Statements

So far, we have described the Prolog statements for logical propositions, which 
are used to describe both known facts and rules that describe logical relation-
ships among facts. These statements are the basis for the theorem-proving 
model. The theorem is in the form of a proposition that we want the system 
to either prove or disprove. In Prolog, these propositions are called goals, or 
queries. The syntactic form of Prolog goal statements is identical to that of 
headless Horn clauses. For example, we could have

man(fred).

to which the system will respond either yes or no. The answer yes means that 
the system has proved the goal was true under the given database of facts and 

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   691

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
692 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

relationships. The answer no means that either the goal was determined to be 
false or the system was simply unable to prove it.

Conjunctive propositions and propositions with variables are also legal 
goals. When variables are present, the system not only asserts the validity of 
the goal but also identifies the instantiations of the variables that make the goal 
true. For example,

father(X, mike).

can be asked. The system will then attempt, through unification, to find an 
instantiation of X that results in a true value for the goal.

Because goal statements and some nongoal statements have the same form 
(headless Horn clauses), a Prolog implementation must have some means of 
distinguishing between the two. Interactive Prolog implementations do this 
by simply having two modes, indicated by different interactive prompts: one 
for entering fact and rule statements and one for entering goals. The user can 
change the mode at any time.

16.6.5  The Inferencing Process of Prolog

This section examines Prolog resolution. Efficient use of Prolog requires that 
the programmer know precisely what the Prolog system does with his or her 
program.

When a goal is a compound proposition, each of the facts (structures) is 
called a subgoal. To prove that a goal is true, the inferencing process must find 
a chain of inference rules and/or facts in the database that connect the goal to 
one or more facts in the database. For example, if Q is the goal, then either Q 
must be found as a fact in the database or the inferencing process must find a 
fact P1 and a sequence of propositions P2, P3 c, Pn such that

P2 :- P1
P3 :- P2
. . .
Q :- Pn

Of course, the process can be and often is complicated by rules with compound 
right sides and rules with variables. The process of finding the Ps, when they 
exist, is basically a comparison, or matching, of terms with each other.

Because the process of proving a subgoal is done through a proposition- 
matching process, it is sometimes called matching. In some cases, proving a 
subgoal is called satisfying that subgoal.
Consider the following query:

man(bob).

This goal statement is the simplest kind. It is relatively easy for resolution to 
determine whether it is true or false: The pattern of this goal is compared with 
the facts and rules in the database. If the database includes the fact

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   692

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
16.6  The Basic Elements of Prolog 

  693

man(bob).

the proof is trivial. If, however, the database contains the following fact and 
inference rule,

father(bob).
man(X) :- father(X).

Prolog would be required to find these two statements and use them to infer 
the truth of the goal. This would necessitate unification to instantiate X tem-
porarily to bob.

Now consider the goal

man(X).

In this case, Prolog must match the goal against the propositions in the data-
base. The first proposition that it finds that has the form of the goal, with any 
object as its parameter, will cause X to be instantiated with that object’s value. 
X is then displayed as the result. If there is no proposition having the form of 
the goal, the system indicates, by saying no, that the goal cannot be satisfied.

There are two opposite approaches to attempting to match a given goal 
to a fact in the database. The system can begin with the facts and rules of the 
database and attempt to find a sequence of matches that lead to the goal. This 
approach is called bottom-up resolution, or forward chaining. The alterna-
tive is to begin with the goal and attempt to find a sequence of matching prop-
ositions that lead to some set of original facts in the database. This approach 
is called top-down resolution, or backward chaining. In general, backward 
chaining works well when there is a reasonably small set of candidate answers. 
The forward chaining approach is better when the number of possibly correct 
answers is large; in this situation, backward chaining would require a very large 
number of matches to get to an answer. Prolog implementations use backward 
chaining for resolution, presumably because its designers believed backward 
chaining was more suitable for a larger class of problems than forward chaining.
The  following  example  illustrates  the  difference  between  forward  and 

backward chaining. Consider the query:

man(bob).

Assume the database contains

father(bob).
man(X) :- father(X).

Forward chaining would search for and find the first proposition. The goal 
is then inferred by matching the first proposition with the right side of the sec-
ond rule (father(X)) through instantiation of X to bob and then matching the 
left side of the second proposition to the goal. Backward chaining would first 

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   693

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
694 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

match the goal with the left side of the second proposition (man(X)) through 
the instantiation of X to bob. As its last step, it would match the right side of 
the second proposition (now father(bob)) with the first proposition.

The next design question arises whenever the goal has more than one 
structure, as in our example. The question then is whether the solution search 
is  done  depth  first  or  breadth  first.  A depth-first  search  finds  a  complete 
sequence of propositions—a proof—for the first subgoal before working on 
the others. A breadth-first search works on all subgoals of a given goal in 
parallel. Prolog’s designers chose the depth-first approach primarily because 
it can be done with fewer computer resources. The breadth-first approach is a 
parallel search that can require a large amount of memory.

The last feature of Prolog’s resolution mechanism that must be discussed 
is backtracking. When a goal with multiple subgoals is being processed and 
the system fails to show the truth of one of the subgoals, the system abandons 
the subgoal it cannot prove. It then reconsiders the previous subgoal, if there 
is one, and attempts to find an alternative solution to it. This backing up in 
the goal to the reconsideration of a previously proven subgoal is called back-
tracking. A new solution is found by beginning the search where the previous 
search for that subgoal stopped. Multiple solutions to a subgoal result from 
different instantiations of its variables. Backtracking can require a great deal of 
time and space because it may have to find all possible proofs to every subgoal. 
These subgoal proofs may not be organized to minimize the time required 
to find the one that will result in the final complete proof, which exacerbates 
the problem.

To solidify your understanding of backtracking, consider the following 
example. Assume that there is a set of facts and rules in the database and that 
Prolog has been presented with the following compound goal:

male(X), parent(X, shelley).

This goal asks whether there is an instantiation of  X such that X is a male 
and X is a parent of shelley. As its first step, Prolog finds the first fact in 
the database with male as its functor. It then instantiates X to the parameter 
of the found fact, say mike. Then, it attempts to prove that parent(mike, 
shelley) is true. If it fails, it backtracks to the first subgoal, male(X), and 
attempts to resatisfy it with some alternative instantiation of X. The resolution 
process may have to find every male in the database before it finds the one 
that is a parent of shelley. It definitely must find all males to prove that 
the goal cannot be satisfied. Note that our example goal might be processed 
more efficiently if the order of the two subgoals were reversed. Then, only 
after resolution had found a parent of shelley would it try to match that 
person with the male subgoal. This is more efficient if shelley has fewer 
parents than there are males in the database, which seems like a reasonable 
assumption. Section 16.7.1 discusses a method of limiting the backtracking 
done by a Prolog system.

Database searches in Prolog always proceed in the direction of first to last.

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   694

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
16.6  The Basic Elements of Prolog 

  695

The following two subsections describe Prolog examples that further illus-

trate the resolution process.

16.6.6  Simple Arithmetic

Prolog supports integer variables and integer arithmetic. Originally, the arith-
metic operators were functors, so that the sum of 7 and the variable X was 
formed with

+(7, X)

Prolog now allows a more abbreviated syntax for arithmetic with the is 
operator. This operator takes an arithmetic expression as its right operand and 
a variable as its left operand. All variables in the expression must already be 
instantiated, but the left-side variable cannot be previously instantiated. For 
example, in

A is B / 17 + C.

if  B  and  C  are  instantiated  but  A  is  not,  then  this  clause  will  cause  A  to  be 
instantiated with the value of the expression. When this happens, the clause 
is satisfied. If either B or C is not instantiated or A is instantiated, the clause is 
not satisfied and no instantiation of A can take place. The semantics of an is 
proposition is considerably different from that of an assignment statement in 
an imperative language. This difference can lead to an interesting scenario. 
Because the  is operator makes the clause in which it appears look like an 
assignment statement, a beginning Prolog programmer may be tempted to 
write a statement such as

Sum is Sum + Number.

which is never useful, or even legal, in Prolog. If Sum is not instantiated, the 
reference to it in the right side is undefined and the clause fails. If Sum is already 
instantiated, the clause fails, because the left operand cannot have a current 
instantiation when is is evaluated. In either case, the instantiation of Sum to 
the new value will not take place. (If the value of Sum + Number is required, it 
can be bound to some new name.)

Prolog does not have assignment statements in the same sense as imper-
ative languages. They are simply not needed in most of the programming for 
which Prolog was designed. The usefulness of assignment statements in imper-
ative languages often depends on the capability of the programmer to control 
the execution control f low of the code in which the assignment statement is 
embedded. Because this type of control is not always possible in Prolog, such 
statements are far less useful.

As a simple example of the use of numeric computation in Prolog, con-
sider the following problem: Suppose we know the average speeds of several 

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   695

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
696 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

automobiles  on  a  particular  racetrack  and  the  amount  of  time  they  are  on 
the track. This basic information can be coded as facts, and the relationship 
between speed, time, and distance can be written as a rule, as in the following:

speed(ford, 100).
speed(chevy, 105).
speed(dodge, 95).
speed(volvo, 80).
time(ford, 20).
time(chevy, 21).
time(dodge, 24).
time(volvo, 24).
distance(X, Y) :- speed(X, Speed),
                  time(X, Time),
                  Y is Speed * Time.

Now, queries can request the distance traveled by a particular car. For 

example, the query

distance(chevy, Chevy_Distance).

instantiates Chevy_Distance with the value 2205. The first two clauses in the 
right side of the distance computation statement instantiate the variables Speed 
and Time with the corresponding values of the given automobile functor. After 
satisfying the goal, Prolog also displays the name Chevy_Distance and its value.
At this point it is instructive to take an operational look at how a Prolog 
system produces results. Prolog has a built-in structure named trace that dis-
plays the instantiations of values to variables at each step during the attempt to 
satisfy a given goal. trace is used to understand and debug Prolog programs. 
To understand trace, it is best to introduce a different model of the execution 
of Prolog programs, called the tracing model.

The tracing model describes Prolog execution in terms of four events: 
(1) call, which occurs at the beginning of an attempt to satisfy a goal, (2) exit, 
which occurs when a goal has been satisfied, (3) redo, which occurs when 
backtrack causes an attempt to resatisfy a goal, and (4) fail, which occurs when 
a goal fails. Call and exit can be related directly to the execution model of a 
subprogram in an imperative language if processes like distance are thought 
of as subprograms. The other two events are unique to logic programming 
systems. In the following trace example, a trace of the computation of the 
value for Chevy_Distance, the goal requires no redo or fail events:

trace.
distance(chevy, Chevy_Distance).

(1) 1 Call: distance(chevy, _0)?
(2) 2 Call: speed(chevy, _5)?

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   696

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
16.6  The Basic Elements of Prolog 

  697

(2) 2 Exit: speed(chevy, 105)
(3) 2 Call: time(chevy, _6)?
(3) 2 Exit: time(chevy, 21)
(4) 2 Call: _0 is 105*21?
(4) 2 Exit: 2205 is 105*21
(1) 1 Exit: distance(chevy, 2205)

Chevy_Distance = 2205

Symbols in the trace that begin with the underscore character ( _ ) are 
internal  variables  used  to  store  instantiated  values.  The  first  column  of 
the trace indicates the subgoal whose match is currently being attempted. 
For example, in the example trace, the first line with the indication (3) is 
an attempt to instantiate the temporary variable _6 with a time value for 
chevy, where time is the second term in the right side of the statement that 
describes the computation of distance. The second column indicates the 
call depth of the matching process. The third column indicates the current 
action.

To illustrate backtracking, consider the following example database and 

traced compound goal:

likes(jake, chocolate).
likes(jake, apricots).
likes(darcie, licorice).
likes(darcie, apricots).

trace.
likes(jake, X), likes(darcie, X).

(1) 1 Call: likes(jake, _0)?
(1) 1 Exit: likes(jake, chocolate)
(2) 1 Call: likes(darcie, chocolate)?
(2) 1 Fail: likes(darcie, chocolate)
(1) 1 Redo: likes(jake, _0)?
(1) 1 Exit: likes(jake, apricots)
(3) 1 Call: likes(darcie, apricots)?
(3) 1 Exit: likes(darcie, apricots)

X = apricots

One can think about Prolog computations graphically as follows: Consider 
each goal as a box with four ports—call, fail, exit, and redo. Control enters a 
goal in the forward direction through its call port. Control can also enter a 
goal from the reverse direction through its redo port. Control can also leave 
a goal in two ways: If the goal succeeded, control leaves through the exit port; 
if the goal failed, control leaves through the fail port. A model of the example 
is shown in Figure 16.1. In this example, control f lows through each subgoal 

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   697

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
698 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

Figure 16.1

Control flow model 
for the goal likes 
(jake, X), likes 
(darcie, X)

Call

Fail

likes (jake, X)

Exit

Call

Redo

Fail

likes (darcie, X)

Exit

Redo

twice. The second subgoal fails the first time, which forces a return through 
redo to the first subgoal.

16.6.7  List Structures

So far, the only Prolog data structure we have discussed is the atomic prop-
osition, which looks more like a function call than a data structure. Atomic 
propositions, which are also called structures, are actually a form of records. 
The other basic data structure supported is the list. Lists are sequences of any 
number of elements, where the elements can be atoms, atomic propositions, 
or any other terms, including other lists.

Prolog uses the syntax of ML and Haskell to specify lists. The list elements 
are separated by commas, and the entire list is delimited by square brackets, 
as in

[apple, prune, grape, kumquat]

The notation [] is used to denote the empty list. Instead of having explicit 
functions for constructing and dismantling lists, Prolog simply uses a special 
notation. [X  |  Y] denotes a list with head X and tail Y, where head and tail 
correspond to CAR and CDR in LISP. This is similar to the notation used in ML 
and Haskell.

A list can be created with a simple structure, as in

new_list([apple, prune, grape, kumquat]).

which states that the constant list [apple,  prune,  grape,  kumquat] is a 
new element of the relation named new_list (a name we just made up). This 
statement does not bind the list to a variable named new_list; rather, it does 
the kind of thing that the proposition

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   698

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
16.6  The Basic Elements of Prolog 

  699

male(jake)

does. That is, it states that [apple,  prune,  grape,  kumquat] is a new 
element of new_list. Therefore, we could have a second proposition with a 
list argument, such as

new_list([apricot, peach, pear])

In query mode, one of the elements of new_list can be dismantled into head 
and tail with

new_list([New_List_Head | New_List_Tail]).

If new_list has been set to have the two elements as shown, this statement 
instantiates New_List_Head with the head of the first list element (in this 
case, apple) and New_List_Tail with the tail of the list (or [prune, grape, 
kumquat]). If this were part of a compound goal and backtracking forced a new 
evaluation of it, New_List_Head and New_List_Tail would be reinstantiated 
to apricot and [peach,  pear], respectively, because [apricot,  peach, 
pear] is the next element of new_list.

The | operator used to dismantle lists can also be used to create lists from 

given instantiated head and tail components, as in

[Element_1 | List_2]

If Element_1 has been instantiated with pickle and List_2 has been instan-
tiated with [peanut, prune, popcorn], the sample notation will create, for 
this one reference, the list [pickle, peanut, prune, popcorn].

As stated previously, the list notation that includes the | symbol is univer-
sal: It can specify either a list construction or a list dismantling. Note further 
that the following are equivalent:

[apricot, peach, pear | []]
[apricot, peach | [pear]]
[apricot | [peach, pear]]

With lists, certain basic operations are often required, such as those found 
in LISP, ML, and Haskell. As an example of such operations in Prolog, we 
examine a definition of append, which is related to such a function in LISP. In 
this example, the differences and similarities between functional and declarative 
languages can be seen. We need not specify how Prolog is to construct a new 
list from the given lists; rather, we need specify only the characteristics of the 
new list in terms of the given lists.

In appearance, the Prolog definition of append is very similar to the ML 
version that appears in Chapter 15, and a kind of recursion in resolution is used 
in a similar way to produce the new list. In the case of Prolog, the recursion 
is caused and controlled by the resolution process. As with ML and Haskell, 

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   699

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
700 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

a pattern-matching process is used to choose, based on the actual parameter, 
between two different definitions of the append process.

The first two parameters to the append operation in the following code 

are the two lists to be appended, and the third parameter is the resulting list:

append([], List, List).
append([Head | List_1], List_2, [Head | List_3]) :-
            append(List_1, List_2, List_3).

The first proposition specifies that when the empty list is appended to any 
other  list,  that  other  list  is  the  result.  This  statement  corresponds  to  the 
 recursion-terminating step of the ML append function. Note that the ter-
minating proposition is placed before the recursion proposition. This is done 
because we know that Prolog will match the two propositions in order, starting 
with the first (because of its use of the depth-first order).

The second proposition specifies several characteristics of the new list. 
It corresponds to the recursion step in the ML function. The left-side pred-
icate states that the first element of the new list is the same as the first ele-
ment of the first given list, because they are both named Head. Whenever 
Head is instantiated to a value, all occurrences of Head in the goal are, in 
effect, simultaneously instantiated to that value. The right side of the sec-
ond statement specifies that the tail of the first given list (List_1) has the 
second given list (List_2) appended to it to form the tail (List_3) of the 
resulting list.

One way to read the second statement of append is as follows: Append-

ing the list [Head  |  List_1] to any list List_2 produces the list [Head 
|  List_3], but only if the list List_3 is formed by appending List_1 to 
List_2. In LISP, this would be

(CONS (CAR FIRST) (APPEND (CDR FIRST) SECOND))

In both the Prolog and LISP versions, the resulting list is not constructed until 
the recursion produces the terminating condition; in this case, the first list must 
become empty. Then, the resulting list is built using the append function itself; 
the elements taken from the first list are added, in reverse order, to the second 
list. The reversing is done by the unraveling of the recursion.

One fundamental difference between Prolog’s append and those of LISP 
and ML is that Prolog’s append is a predicate—it does not return a list, it 
returns yes or no. The new list is the value of its third parameter.

To illustrate how the append process progresses, consider the following 

traced example:

trace.
append([bob, jo], [jake, darcie], Family).

(1) 1 Call: append([bob, jo], [jake, darcie], _10)?

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   700

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
16.6  The Basic Elements of Prolog 

  701

(2) 2 Call: append([jo], [jake, darcie], _18)?
(3) 3 Call: append([], [jake, darcie], _25)?
(3) 3 Exit: append([], [jake, darcie], [jake, darcie])
(2) 2 Exit: append([jo], [jake, darcie], [jo, jake,
                    darcie])
(1) 1 Exit: append([bob, jo], [jake, darcie],
                   [bob, jo, jake, darcie])
Family = [bob, jo, jake, darcie]
yes

The first two calls, which represent subgoals, have List_1 nonempty, so they 
create the recursive calls from the right side of the second statement. The 
left side of the second statement effectively specifies the arguments for the 
recursive calls, or goals, thus dismantling the first list one element per step. 
When the first list becomes empty, in a call, or subgoal, the current instance 
of the right side of the second statement succeeds by matching the first state-
ment. The effect of this is to return as the third parameter the value of the 
empty list appended to the second original parameter list. On successive exits, 
which represent successful matches, the elements that were removed from 
the first list are appended to the resulting list, Family. When the exit from 
the first goal is accomplished, the process is complete, and the resulting list 
is displayed.

Another difference between Prolog’s append and those of LISP and ML is 
that Prolog’s append is more f lexible than that of those languages. For exam-
ple, in Prolog we can use append to determine what two lists can be appended 
to get [a, b, c] with

append(X, Y, [a, b, c]).

This results in the following:

X = []
Y = [a, b, c]

If we type a semicolon at this output we get the alternative result:

X = [a]
Y = [b, c]

Continuing, we get the following:

X = [a, b]
Y = [c];
X = [a, b, c]
Y = []

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   701

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
702 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

The append predicate can also be used to create other list operations, such 
as the following, whose effect we invite the reader to determine. Note that 
list_op_2 is meant to be used by providing a list as its first parameter and a 
variable as its second, and the result of list_op_2 is the value to which the 
second parameter is instantiated.

list_op_2([], []).
list_op_2([Head | Tail], List) :-
list_op_2(Tail, Result), append(Result, [Head], List).

As you may have been able to determine,  list_op_2 causes the Prolog 
system  to  instantiate  its  second  parameter  with  a  list  that  has  the  ele-
ments of the list of the first parameter, but in reverse order. For exam-
ple, ([apple, orange, grape], Q) instantiates Q with the list [grape, 
orange, apple].

Once again, although the LISP and Prolog languages are fundamentally 
different, similar operations can use similar approaches. In the case of the 
reverse operation, both the Prolog’s list_op_2 and LISP’s reverse function 
include the recursion-terminating condition, along with the basic process of 
appending the reversal of the CDR or tail of the list to the CAR or head of the 
list to create the result list.

The following is a trace of this process, now named reverse:

trace.
reverse([a, b, c], Q).

(1) 1 Call: reverse([a, b, c], _6)?
(2) 2 Call: reverse([b, c], _65636)?
(3) 3 Call: reverse([c], _65646)?
(4) 4 Call: reverse([], _65656)?
(4) 4 Exit: reverse([], [])
(5) 4 Call: append([], [c], _65646)?
(5) 4 Exit: append([], [c], [c])
(3) 3 Exit: reverse([c], [c])
(6) 3 Call: append([c], [b], _65636)?
(7) 4 Call: append([], [b], _25)?
(7) 4 Exit: append([], [b], [b])
(6) 3 Exit: append([c], [b], [c, b])
(2) 2 Exit: reverse([b, c], [c, b])
(8) 2 Call: append([c, b], [a], _6)?
(9) 3 Call: append([b], [a], _32)?
(10) 4 Call: append([], [a], _39)?
(10) 4 Exit: append([], [a], [a])
(9) 3 Exit: append([b], [a], [b, a])
(8) 2 Exit: append([c, b], [a], [c, b, a])
(1) 1 Exit: reverse([a, b, c], [c, b, a])

Q = [c, b, a]

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   702

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
16.7  Deficiencies of Prolog 

  703

Suppose we need to be able to determine whether a given symbol is in a 

given list. A straightforward Prolog description of this is

member(Element, [Element | _]).
member(Element, [_ | List]) :- member(Element, List).

The underscore indicates an “anonymous” variable; it is used to mean 
that we do not care what instantiation it might get from unification. The first 
 statement  in  the  previous  example  succeeds  if  Element  is  the  head  of  the 
list, either initially or after several recursions through the second statement. 
The second statement succeeds if Element is in the tail of the list. Consider 
the  following traced examples:

trace.
member(a, [b, c, d]).
(1) 1 Call: member(a, [b, c, d])?
(2) 2 Call: member(a, [c, d])?
(3) 3 Call: member(a, [d])?
(4) 4 Call: member(a, [])?
(4) 4 Fail: member(a, [])
(3) 3 Fail: member(a, [d])
(2) 2 Fail: member(a, [c, d])
(1) 1 Fail: member(a, [b, c, d])
no

member(a, [b, a, c]).
(1) 1 Call: member(a, [b, a, c])?
(2) 2 Call: member(a, [a, c])?
(2) 2 Exit: member(a, [a, c])
(1) 1 Exit: member(a, [b, a, c])
yes

16.7  Deficiencies of Prolog

Although Prolog is a useful tool, it is neither a pure nor a perfect logic pro-
gramming language. This section describes some of the problems with Prolog.

16.7.1  Resolution Order Control

Prolog, for reasons of efficiency, allows the user to control the ordering of 
 pattern matching during resolution. In a pure logic programming environment, 
the order of attempted matches that take place during resolution is nondeter-
ministic, and all matches could be attempted concurrently. However, because 
Prolog always matches in the same order, starting at the beginning of the data-
base and at the left end of a given goal, the user can profoundly affect efficiency 

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   703

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
704 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

by ordering the database statements to optimize a particular application. For 
example, if the user knows that certain rules are much more likely to succeed 
than the others during a particular “execution,” then the program can be made 
more efficient by placing those rules at the beginning of the database.

In addition to allowing the user to control database and subgoal order-
ing, Prolog, in another concession to efficiency, allows some explicit control 
of backtracking. This is done with the cut operator, which is specified by an 
exclamation point (!). The cut operator is actually a goal, not an operator. 
As a goal, it always succeeds immediately, but it cannot be resatisfied through 
backtracking. Thus, a side effect of the cut is that subgoals to its left in a 
compound goal also cannot be resatisfied through backtracking. For example, 
in the goal

a, b, !, c, d.

if both a and b succeed but c fails, the whole goal fails. This goal would be used 
if it were known that whenever c fails, it is a waste of time to resatisfy b or a.

The purpose of the cut then is to allow the user to make programs more 
efficient by telling the system when it should not attempt to resatisfy subgoals 
that presumably could not result in a complete proof.

As an example of the use of the cut operator, consider the member rules 

from Section 16.6.7, which are:

member(Element, [Element | _]).
member(Element, [_ | List]) :- member(Element, List).

If the list argument to member represents a set, then it can be satisfied only once 
(sets contain no duplicate elements). Therefore, if member is used as a subgoal 
in a multiple subgoal goal statement, there can be a problem. The problem is 
that if member succeeds but the next subgoal fails, backtracking will attempt to 
resatisfy member by continuing a prior match. But because the list argument 
to member has only one copy of the element to begin with, member cannot 
possibly succeed again, which eventually causes the whole goal to fail, in spite 
of any additional attempts to resatisfy member. For example, consider the goal:

dem_candidate(X) :- member(X, democrats), tests(X).

This goal determines whether a given person is a democrat and is a good 
candidate to run for a particular position. The tests subgoal checks a vari-
ety of characteristics of the given democrat to determine the suitability of 
the person for the position. If the set of democrats has no duplicates, then 
we do not want to back up to the member subgoal if the tests subgoal fails, 
because member will search all of the other democrats but fail, because there 
are no duplicates. The second attempt of member subgoal will be a waste of 
computation time. The solution to this inefficiency is to add a right side to 
the first statement of the member definition, with the cut operator as the sole 
element, as in

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   704

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
16.7  Deficiencies of Prolog 

  705

member(Element, [Element | _]) :- !.

Backtracking will not attempt to resatisfy member but instead will cause the 
entire subgoal to fail.

Cut is particularly useful in  a programming strategy  in  Prolog called 
generate and test. In programs that use the generate-and-test strategy, the 
goal consists of subgoals that generate potential solutions, which are then 
checked by later “test” subgoals. Rejected solutions require backtracking to 
“generator” subgoals, which generate new potential solutions. As an example 
of a generate-and-test program, consider the following, which appears in 
Clocksin and Mellish (2013):

divide(N1, N2, Result) :- is_integer(Result),

Product1 is Result * N2,
Product2 is (Result + 1) * N2,
Product1 =< N1, Product2 >
  N1, !.

This program performs integer division, using addition and multiplication. 
Because most Prolog systems provide division as an operator, this program actu-
ally is not useful, other than to illustrate a simple generate-and-test program.

The  predicate  is_integer  succeeds  as  long  as  its  parameter  can  be 
instantiated to some nonnegative integer. If its argument is not instantiated, 
is_integer instantiates it to the value 0. If the argument is instantiated to an 
integer, is_integer instantiates it to the next larger integer value.

So, in divide, is_integer is the generator subgoal. It generates ele-
ments of the sequence 0, 1, 2, . . . , one each time it is satisfied. All of the other 
subgoals are the testing subgoals—they check to determine whether the value 
produced by is_integer is, in fact, the quotient of the first two parameters, 
N1 and N2. The purpose of the cut as the last subgoal is simple: It prevents 
divide from ever trying to find an alternative solution once it has found the 
solution. Although is_integer can generate a huge number of candidates, 
only one is the solution, so the cut here prevents useless attempts to produce 
secondary solutions.

Use of the cut operator has been compared to the use of the goto in imper-
ative languages (van Emden, 1980). Although it is sometimes needed, it is pos-
sible to abuse it. Indeed, it is sometimes used to make logic programs have a 
control f low that is inspired by imperative programming styles.

The ability to tamper with control f low in a Prolog program is a deficiency, 
because it is directly detrimental to one of the important advantages of logic 
programming—that programs do not specify how solutions are to be found. 
Rather, they simply specify what the solution should look like. This design 
makes programs easier to write and easier to read. They are not cluttered with 
the details of how the solutions are to be determined and, in particular, the 
precise order in which the computations are done to produce the solution. So, 
while logic programming requires no control f low directions, Prolog programs 
frequently use them, mostly for the sake of efficiency.

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   705

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
706 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

16.7.2  The Closed-World Assumption

The nature of Prolog’s resolution sometimes creates misleading results. The 
only truths, as far as Prolog is concerned, are those that can be proved using its 
database. It has no knowledge of the world other than its database. When the 
system receives a query and the database does not have information to prove the 
query absolutely, the query is assumed to be false. Prolog can prove that a given 
goal is true, but it cannot prove that a given goal is false. It simply assumes that, 
because it cannot prove a goal true, the goal must be false. In essence, Prolog 
is a true/fail system, rather than a true/false system.

Actually, the closed-world assumption should not be at all foreign to you—
our judicial system operates the same way. Suspects are innocent until proven 
guilty. They need not be proven innocent. If a trial cannot prove a person 
guilty, he or she is considered innocent.

The problem of the closed-world assumption is related to the negation 

problem, which is discussed in the following subsection.

16.7.3  The Negation Problem

Another problem with Prolog is its difficulty with negation. Consider the fol-
lowing database of two facts and a relationship:

parent(bill, jake).
parent(bill, shelley).
sibling(X, Y) :- (parent(M, X), parent(M, Y).

Now, suppose we typed the query

sibling(X, Y).

Prolog will respond with

X = jake
Y = jake

Thus, Prolog “thinks” jake is a sibling of himself. This happens because the 
system first instantiates M with bill and X with jake to make the first subgoal, 
parent(M,  X), true. It then starts at the beginning of the database again to 
match the second subgoal, parent(M,  Y), and arrives at the instantiations 
of M with bill and Y with jake. Because the two subgoals are satisfied inde-
pendently, with both matchings starting at the database’s beginning, the shown 
response appears. To avoid this result, X must be specified to be a sibling of Y 
only if they have the same parents and they are not the same. Unfortunately, 
stating that they are not equal is not straightforward in Prolog, as we will dis-
cuss. The most exacting method would require adding a fact for every pair of 
atoms, stating that they were not the same. This can, of course, cause the data-
base to become very large, for there is often far more negative information than 

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   706

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
16.7  Deficiencies of Prolog 

  707

positive information. For example, most people have 364 more unbirthdays 
than they have birthdays.

A simple alternative solution is to state in the goal that X must not be the 

same as Y, as in

sibling(X, Y) :- parent(M, X), parent(M, Y), not(X = Y).

In other situations, the solution is not so simple.

The Prolog not operator is satisfied in this case if resolution cannot satisfy 
the subgoal X = Y. Therefore, if the not succeeds, it does not necessarily mean 
that X is not equal to Y; rather, it means that resolution cannot prove from the 
database that X is the same as Y. Thus, the Prolog not operator is not equivalent 
to a logical NOT operator, in which NOT means that its operand is probably 
true. This nonequivalency can lead to a problem if we happen to have a goal 
of the form

not(not(some_goal)).

which would be equivalent to

some_goal.

if Prolog’s not operator were a true logical NOT operator. In some cases, 
however, they are not the same. For example, consider again the member 
rules:

member(Element, [Element | _]) :- !.
member(Element, [_ | List]) :- member(Element, List).

To discover one of the elements of a given list, we could use the goal

member(X, [mary, fred, barb]).

which would cause X to be instantiated with mary, which would then be printed. 
But if we used

not(not(member(X, [mary, fred, barb]))).

the following sequence of events would take place: First, the inner goal would 
succeed, instantiating X to mary. Then, Prolog would attempt to satisfy the 
next goal:

not(member(X, [mary, fred, barb])).

This statement would fail because member succeeded. When this goal failed, 
X would be uninstantiated, because Prolog always uninstantiates all variables 
in all goals that fail. Next, Prolog would attempt to satisfy the outer not goal, 

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   707

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
708 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

which would succeed, because its argument had failed. Finally, the result, which 
is X, would be printed. But X would not be currently instantiated, so the system 
would indicate that. Generally, uninstantiated variables are printed in the form 
of a string of digits preceded by an underscore. So, the fact that Prolog’s not is 
not equivalent to a logical NOT can be, at the very least, misleading.

The fundamental reason why logical NOT cannot be an integral part of 

Prolog is the form of the Horn clause:

A :- B1 ¨ B2 ¨  . . .  ¨ Bn

If all the B propositions are true, it can be concluded that A is true. But regard-
less of the truth or falseness of any or all of the B’s, it cannot be concluded that 
A is false. From positive logic, one can conclude only positive logic. Thus, the 
use of Horn clause form prevents any negative conclusions.

16.7.4 

Intrinsic Limitations

A fundamental goal of logic programming, as stated in Section 16.4, is to pro-
vide nonprocedural programming; that is, a system by which programmers 
specify what a program is supposed to do but need not specify how that is to be 
accomplished. The example given there for sorting is rewritten here:

sort(old_list, new_list) ⊂ permute(old_list, new_list) ¨ sorted(new_list)
sorted(list) ⊂ 5j such that 1 … j 6 n, list(j) … list (j+1)

It is straightforward to write this in Prolog. For example, the sorted subgoal 
can be expressed as

sorted ([]).
sorted ([x]).
sorted ([x, y | list]) :- x <= y, sorted ([y | list]).

The problem with this sort process is that it has no idea of how to sort, other 
than simply to enumerate all permutations of the given list until it happens to 
create the one that has the list in sorted order—a very slow process, indeed.

So far, no one has discovered a process by which the description of a sorted 
list can be transformed into some efficient algorithm for sorting. Resolution is 
capable of many interesting things, but certainly not this. Therefore, a Prolog 
program that sorts a list must specify the details of how that sorting can be 
done, as is the case in an imperative or functional language.

Do all of these problems mean that logic programming should be aban-
doned? Absolutely not! As it is, it is capable of dealing with many useful appli-
cations. Furthermore, it is based on an intriguing concept and is therefore 
interesting in and of itself. Finally, there is the possibility that new inferencing 
techniques will be developed that will allow a logic programming language 
system to efficiently deal with progressively larger classes of problems.

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   708

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
16.8  Applications of Logic Programming 

  709

16.8  Applications of Logic Programming

In this section, we brief ly describe a few of the larger classes of present and 
potential applications of logic programming in general and Prolog in particular.

16.8.1  Relational Database Management Systems

Relational database management systems (RDBMSs) store data in the form 
of tables. Queries on such databases are often stated in Structured Query 
Language (SQL). SQL is nonprocedural in the same sense that logic pro-
gramming is nonprocedural. The user does not describe how to retrieve the 
answer; rather, he or she describes only the characteristics of the answer. 
The connection between logic programming and RDBMSs should be obvi-
ous. Simple tables of information can be described by Prolog structures, 
and relationships between tables can be conveniently and easily described 
by Prolog rules. The retrieval process is inherent in the resolution opera-
tion. The goal statements of Prolog provide the queries for the RDBMS. 
Logic programming is thus a natural match to the needs of implementing 
an RDBMS.

One  of  the  advantages  of  using  logic  programming  to  implement  an 
RDBMS is that only a single language is required. In a typical RDBMS, a 
database language includes statements for data definitions, data manipulation, 
and queries, all of which are embedded in a general-purpose programming lan-
guage, such as COBOL. The general-purpose language is used for processing 
the data and input and output functions. All of these functions can be done in 
a logic programming language.

Another advantage of using logic programming to implement an RDBMS 
is that deductive capability is built in. Conventional RDBMSs cannot deduce 
anything from a database other than what is explicitly stored in them. They 
contain only facts, rather than facts and inference rules. The primary disad-
vantage of using logic programming for an RDBMS, compared with a con-
ventional RDBMS, is that the logic programming implementation is slower. 
Logical  inferences  take  longer  than  ordinary  table  look-up  methods  using 
imperative programming techniques.

16.8.2  Expert Systems

Expert systems are computer systems designed to emulate human expertise in 
some particular domain. They consist of a database of facts, an inferencing pro-
cess, some heuristics about the domain, and some friendly human interface that 
makes the system appear much like an expert human consultant. In addition 
to their initial knowledge base, which is provided by a human expert, expert 
systems learn from the process of being used, so their databases must be capable 
of growing dynamically. Also, an expert system should include the capability 
of interrogating the user to get additional information when it determines that 
such information is needed.

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   709

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
710 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

One of the central problems for the designer of an expert system is dealing 
with the inevitable inconsistencies and incompleteness of the database. Logic 
programming appears to be well suited to deal with these problems. For exam-
ple, default inference rules can help deal with the problem of incompleteness.
Prolog can and has been used to construct expert systems. It can easily 
fulfill the basic needs of expert systems, using resolution as the basis for query 
processing, using its ability to add facts and rules to provide the learning capa-
bility, and using its trace facility to inform the user of the “reasoning” behind 
a given result. Missing from Prolog is the automatic ability of the system to 
query the user for additional information when it is needed.

One of the most widely known uses of logic programming in expert systems 
is the expert system construction system known as APES, which is described 
in Sergot (1983) and Hammond (1983). The APES system includes a very 
f lexible facility for gathering information from the user during expert system 
construction. It also includes a second interpreter for producing explanations 
to its answers to queries.

APES has been successfully used to produce several expert systems, includ-
ing one for the rules of a government social benefits program and one for 
the British Nationality Act, which is the definitive source for rules of British 
citizenship.

16.8.3  Natural-Language Processing

Certain  kinds  of  natural-language  processing  can  be  done  with  logic  pro-
gramming. In particular, natural-language interfaces to computer software 
systems, such as intelligent databases and other intelligent knowledge-based 
systems, can be conveniently done with logic programming. For describing 
language syntax, forms of logic programming have been found to be equiva-
lent to context-free grammars. Proof procedures in logic programming sys-
tems have been found to be equivalent to certain parsing strategies. In fact, 
backward-chaining resolution can be used directly to parse sentences whose 
structures are described by context-free grammars. It has also been discov-
ered that some kinds of semantics of natural languages can be made clear by 
modeling the languages with logic programming. In particular, research in 
logic-based semantics networks has shown that sets of sentences in natural 
languages can be expressed in clausal form (Deliyanni and Kowalski, 1979). 
Kowalski (1979) also discusses logic-based semantic networks.

S U M M A R Y

Symbolic logic provides the basis for logic programming and logic program-
ming languages. The approach of logic programming is to use as a database 
a collection of facts and rules that state relationships between facts and to use 
an automatic inferencing process to check the validity of new propositions, 

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   710

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
Review Questions 

  711

assuming the facts and rules of the database are true. This approach is the one 
developed for automatic theorem proving.

Prolog is the most widely used logic programming language. The origins 
of logic programming lie in Robinson’s development of the resolution rule for 
logical inference. Prolog was developed primarily by Colmeraeur and Roussel 
at Marseille, with some help from Kowalski at Edinburgh.

Logic programs are nonprocedural, which means that the characteristics of 

the solution are given but the process of getting the solution is not.

Prolog statements are facts, rules, or goals. Most are made up of struc-
tures, which are atomic propositions, and logic operators, although arithmetic 
expressions are also allowed.

Resolution is the primary activity of a Prolog interpreter. This process, 
which uses backtracking extensively, involves mainly pattern matching among 
propositions. When variables are involved, they can be instantiated to values 
to provide matches. This instantiation process is called unification.

There are a number of problems with the current state of logic program-
ming. For reasons of efficiency, and even to avoid infinite loops, programmers 
must sometimes state control f low information in their programs. Also, there 
are the problems of the closed-world assumption and negation.

Logic programming has been used in a number of different areas, pri-
marily in relational database systems, expert systems, and natural-language 
processing.

B I B L I O G R A P H I C   N O T E S

The Prolog language is described in several books. Edinburgh’s form of the 
language is covered in Clocksin and Mellish (2003). The microcomputer imple-
mentation is described in Clark and McCabe (1984).

Hogger  (1991)  is  an  excellent  book  on  the  general  topic  of  logic  pro-
gramming. It is the source of the material in this chapter’s section on logic 
programming applications.

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  What are the three primary uses of symbolic logic in formal logic?

2.  What are the two parts of a compound term?

3.  What are the two modes in which a proposition can be stated?
4.  What is the general form of a proposition in clausal form?
5.  What are antecedents? Consequences?
6.  Give general (not rigorous) definitions of resolution and unification.
7.  What are the forms of Horn clauses?

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   711

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
712 

  Chapter 16  

 Logic Programming Languages

8.  What is the basic concept of declarative semantics?

9.  What does it mean for a language to be nonprocedural?

10.  What are the three forms of a Prolog term?

11.  What is an uninstantiated variable?

12.  What are the syntactic forms and usage of fact and rule statements in 

Prolog?

13.  What is a conjunction?

14.  Explain the two approaches to matching goals to facts in a database.

15.  Explain the difference between a depth-first and a breadth-first search 

when discussing how multiple goals are satisfied.

16.  Explain how backtracking works in Prolog.

17.  Explain what is wrong with the Prolog statement K is K + 1.

18.  What are the two ways a Prolog programmer can control the order of 

pattern matching during resolution?

19.  Explain the generate-and-test programming strategy in Prolog.

20.  Explain the closed-world assumption used by Prolog. Why is this a 

limitation?

21.  Explain the negation problem with Prolog. Why is this a limitation?

22.  Explain the connection between automatic theorem proving and Prolog’s 

inferencing process.

23.  Explain the difference between procedural and nonprocedural languages.

24.  Explain why Prolog systems must do backtracking.

25.  What is the relationship between resolution and unification in Prolog?

P R O B L E M   S E T

1.  Compare the concept of data typing in C# with that of Prolog.

2.  Describe how a multiple-processor machine could be used to implement 

resolution. Could Prolog, as currently defined, use this method?

3.  Write a Prolog description of your family tree (based only on facts), 

going back to your grandparents and including all descendants. Be sure 
to include all relationships.

4.  Write a set of rules for family relationships, including all relationships 

from grandparents through two generations. Now add these to the facts 
of Problem 3, and eliminate as many of the facts as you can.

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   712

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
 
Programming Exercises 

  713

5.  Write the following English conditional statements as Prolog-headed 

Horn clauses:

a.  If Fred is the father of Mike, then Fred is an ancestor of Mike.

b.  If Mike is the father of Joe and Mike is the father of Mary, then Mary is 

the sister of Joe.

c.  If Mike is the brother of Fred and Fred is the father of Mary, then Mike is 

the uncle of Mary.

6.  Explain two ways in which the list-processing capabilities of Scheme and 

Prolog are similar.

7.  In what way are the list-processing capabilities of Scheme and Prolog 

different?

8.  Write a comparison of Prolog with ML, including two similarities and 

two differences.

9.  From a book on Prolog, learn and write a description of an occur-
check problem. Why does Prolog allow this problem to exist in its 
implementation?

10.  Find a good source of information on Skolem normal form and write a 

brief but clear explanation of it.

P R O G R A M M I N G   E X E R C I S E S

1.  Using the structures parent(X, Y), male(X), and female(X), write a 

structure that defines mother(X, Y).

2.  Using the structures parent(X, Y), male(X), and female(X), write a 

structure that defines sister(X, Y).

3.  Write a Prolog program that finds the maximum of a list of numbers.

4.  Write a Prolog program that succeeds if the intersection of two given list 

parameters is empty.

5.  Write a Prolog program that returns a list containing the union of the 

elements of two given lists.

6.  Write a Prolog program that returns the final element of a given list.

7.  Write a Prolog program that implements quicksort.

M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   713

1/5/18   11:06 PM

 
 
 
M16_SEBE8029_12_SE_C16.indd   714

1/5/18   11:06 PM

Bibliography

ACM. (1979) “Part A: Preliminary Ada Reference Manual” and “Part B: Rationale 

for the Design of the Ada Programming Language.” SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 14, 
No. 6.

ACM. (1993a) “History of Programming Language Conference Proceedings.” ACM 

SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 28, No. 3, March.

ACM. (1993b) “High Performance FORTRAN Language Specification Part 1.” 

FORTRAN Forum, Vol. 12, No. 4.

Aho, A. V., B. W. Kernighan, and P. J. Weinberger. (1988) The AWK Programming 

Language. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

Aho, A. V., M. S. Lam, R. Sethi, and J. D. Ullman. (2006) Compilers: Principles, 

Techniques, and Tools, 2e. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

Albahari, J. and B. Abrahari (2012) C# 5.0 in a Nutshell, O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, CA.
Andrews, G. R., and F. B. Schneider. (1983) “Concepts and Notations for Concurrent 

Programming.” ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 3–43.

ANSI. (1966) American National Standard Programming Language FORTRAN. 

American National Standards Institute, New York.

ANSI. (1976) American National Standard Programming Language PL/I. ANSI 

X3.53–1976. American National Standards Institute, New York.

ANSI. (1978a) American National Standard Programming Language FORTRAN. 

ANSI X3.9–1978. American National Standards Institute, New York.
ANSI. (1978b) American National Standard Programming Language Minimal 

BASIC. ANSI X3.60–1978. American National Standards Institute, New York.

ANSI. (1989) American National Standard Programming Language C. ANSI 

X3.159–1989. American National Standards Institute, New York.

ANSI. (1992) American National Standard Programming Language FORTRAN 90. 

ANSI X3. 198–1992. American National Standards Institute, New York.
Arden, B. W., B. A. Galler, and R. M. Graham. (1961) “MAD at Michigan.” 

Datamation, Vol. 7, No. 12, pp. 27–28.

ARM. (1995) Ada Reference Manual. ISO/IEC/ANSI 8652:19. Intermetrics, 

Cambridge, MA.

Arnold, K., J. Gosling, and D. Holmes. (2006) The Java (TM) Programming 

Language, 4e. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

Backus, J. (1954) “The IBM 701 Speedcoding System.” J. ACM, Vol. 1, pp. 4–6.

715

Z01_SEBE8029_12_SE_BIB.indd   715

1/5/18   10:12 PM

716 

  Bibliography

Backus, J. (1959) “The Syntax and Semantics of the Proposed International Algebraic 
Language of the Zurich ACM-GAMM Conference.” Proceedings International 
Conference on Information Processing. UNESCO, Paris, pp. 125–132.

Backus, J. (1978) “Can Programming Be Liberated from the von Neumann Style? 
A Functional Style and Its Algebra of Programs.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 21, 
No. 8, pp. 613–641.

Backus, J., F. L. Bauer, J. Green, C. Katz, J. McCarthy, P. Naur, A. J. Perlis, H. 

Rutishauser, K. Samelson, B. Vauquois, J. H. Wegstein, A. van Wijngaarden, and 
M. Woodger. (1963) “Revised Report on the Algorithmic Language ALGOL 60.” 
Commun. ACM, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 1–17.

Ben-Ari, M. (1982) Principles of Concurrent Programming. Prentice Hall, Engle-

wood Cliffs, NJ.

Birtwistle, G. M., O.-J. Dahl, B. Myhrhaug, and K. Nygaard. (1973) Simula BEGIN. 

Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.

Bodwin, J. M., L. Bradley, K. Kanda, D. Litle, and U. F. Pleban. (1982) “Experience 

with an Experimental Compiler Generator Based on Denotational Semantics.” 
ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 17, No. 6, pp. 216–229.

Bohm, C., and G. Jacopini. (1966) “Flow Diagrams, Turing Machines, and Languages 
with Only Two Formation Rules.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 9, No. 5, pp. 366–371.
Bolsky, M., and D. Korn. (1995) The New KornShell Command and Programming 

Language. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Booch, G. (1987) Software Engineering with Ada, 2e. Benjamin/Cummings, Red-

wood City, CA.

Brinch Hansen, P. (1973) Operating System Principles. Prentice Hall, Englewood 

Cliffs, NJ.

Brinch Hansen, P. (1975) “The Programming Language Concurrent-Pascal.” IEEE 

Transactions on Software Engineering, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 199–207.

Brinch Hansen, P. (1977) The Architecture of Concurrent Programs. Prentice Hall, 

Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Brinch Hansen, P. (1978) “Distributed Processes: A Concurrent Programming Con-

cept.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 21, No. 11, pp. 934–941.

Brown, J. A., S. Pakin, and R. P. Polivka. (1988) APL2 at a Glance. Prentice Hall, 

Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Campione, M., K. Walrath, and A. Huml. (2001) The Java Tutorial, 3e. Addison-

Wesley, Reading, MA.

Chambers, C., and D. Ungar. (1991) “Making Pure Object-Oriented Languages 

Practical.” SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 1–15.

Chomsky, N. (1956) “Three Models for the Description of Language.” IRE Transac-

tions on Information Theory, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 113–124.

Chomsky, N. (1959) “On Certain Formal Properties of Grammars.” Information and 

Control, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 137–167.

Christiansen, T., B. D. Foy, and L. Wall, with J. Orwant. (2013) Programming Perl, 

4e. O’Reilly & Associates, Sebastopol, CA.

Church, A. (1941) Annals of Mathematics Studies. Calculi of Lambda Conversion, 
Vol. 6. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ. Reprinted by Klaus Reprint 
Corporation, New York, 1965.

Clark, K. L., and F. G. McCabe. (1984) Micro-PROLOG: Programming in Logic. 

Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Clarke, L. A., J. C. Wileden, and A. L. Wolf. (1980) “Nesting in Ada Is for the Birds.” 

ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 15, No. 11, pp. 139–145.

Z01_SEBE8029_12_SE_BIB.indd   716

1/5/18   10:12 PM

 
 
 
 
Bibliography 

  717

Cleaveland, J. C. (1986) An Introduction to Data Types. Addison-Wesley, 

Reading, MA.

Cleaveland, J. C., and R. C. Uzgalis. (1976) Grammars for Programming Languages: 
What Every Programmer Should Know About Grammar. American Elsevier, 
New York.

Clocksin, W. F., and C. S. Mellish. (2013) Programming in Prolog: Using the ISO 

Standard. Springer-Verlag, New York.

Cohen, J. (1981) “Garbage Collection of Linked Data Structures.” ACM Computing 

Surveys, Vol. 13, No. 3, pp. 341–368.

Conway, R., and R. Constable. (1976) “PL/-CS—A Disciplined Subset of PL/I.” 

Technical Report TR76/293. Department of Computer Science, Cornell Univer-
sity, Ithaca, NY.

Cornell University. (1977) PL/C User’s Guide, Release 7.6. Department of Computer 

Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.

Correa, N. (1992) “Empty Categories, Chain Binding, and Parsing.” In Principle— 

Based Parsing, R. C. Berwick, S. P. Abney, and C. Tenny (eds.). Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Boston, pp. 83–121.

Cousineau, G., M. Mauny, and K. Callaway. (1998) The Functional Approach to 

Programming. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Dahl, O.-J., E. W. Dijkstra, and C. A. R. Hoare. (1972) Structured Programming. 

Academic Press, New York.

Dahl, O.-J., and K. Nygaard. (1967) SIMULA 67 Common Base Proposal. Norwe-

gian Computing Center Document, Oslo.

Deliyanni, A., and R. A. Kowalski. (1979) “Logic and Semantic Networks.” Commun. 

ACM, Vol. 22, No. 3, pp. 184–192.

Department of Defense. (1960) COBOL, Initial Specifications for a Common Busi-
ness Oriented Language. U.S. Department of Defense, Washington, D.C.

Department of Defense. (1961) COBOL—1961, Revised Specifications for 
a Common Business Oriented Language. U.S. Department of Defense, 
Washington, D.C.

Department of Defense. (1962) COBOL—1961 EXTENDED, Extended Specifica-
tions for a Common Business Oriented Language. U.S. Department of Defense, 
Washington, D.C.

Department of Defense. (1975a) Requirements for High Order Programming 

Languages, STRAWMAN. July. U.S. Department of Defense, Washington, D.C.

Department of Defense. (1975b) Requirements for High Order Program-

ming Languages, WOODENMAN. August. U.S. Department of Defense, 
Washington, D.C.

Department of Defense. (1976) Requirements for High Order Programming 

Languages, TINMAN. June. U.S. Department of Defense, Washington, D.C.

Department of Defense. (1977) Requirements for High Order Programming 

Languages, IRONMAN. January. U.S. Department of Defense, Washington, D.C.

Department of Defense. (1978) Requirements for High Order Programming 

Languages, STEELMAN. June. U.S. Department of Defense, Washington, D.C.

Department of Defense. (1980) Requirements for High Order Programming Lan-

guages, STONEMAN. February. U.S. Department of Defense, Washington, D.C.

DeRemer, F. (1971) “Simple LR(k) Grammars.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 14, No. 7, 

pp. 453–460.

DeRemer, F., and T. Pennello. (1982) “Efficient Computation of LALR(1) Look-

Ahead Sets.” ACM TOPLAS, Vol. 4, No. 4, pp. 615–649.

Z01_SEBE8029_12_SE_BIB.indd   717

1/5/18   10:12 PM

 
 
 
718 

  Bibliography

Deutsch, L. P., and D. G. Bobrow. (1976) “An Efficient Incremental Automatic 

Garbage Collector.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 11, No. 3, pp. 522–526.

Dijkstra, E. W. (1968a) “Goto Statement Considered Harmful.” Commun. ACM, 

Vol. 11, No. 3, pp. 147–149.

Dijkstra, E. W. (1968b) “Cooperating Sequential Processes.” In Programming Lan-

guages, F. Genuys (ed.). Academic Press, New York, pp. 43–112.

Dijkstra, E. W. (1972) “The Humble Programmer.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 15, 

No. 10, pp. 859–866.

Dijkstra, E. W. (1975) “Guarded Commands, Nondeterminacy, and Formal Deriva-

tion of Programs.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 18, No. 8, pp. 453–457.

Dijkstra, E. W. (1976) A Discipline of Programming. Prentice Hall, Englewood 

Cliffs, NJ.

Dybvig, R. K. (2011) The Scheme Programming Language, 4e. MIT Press, Boston.
Ellis, M. A., and B. Stroustrup. (1990) The Annotated C++ Reference Manual. 

Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

Farber, D. J., R. E. Griswold, and I. P. Polonsky. (1964) “SNOBOL, a String Manipu-

lation Language.” J. ACM, Vol. 11, No. 1, pp. 21–30.

Farrow, R. (1982) “LINGUIST 86: Yet Another Translator Writing System Based on 
Attribute Grammars.” ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 17, No. 6, pp. 160–171.
Fischer, C. N., G. F. Johnson, J. Mauney, A. Pal, and D. L. Stock. (1984) “The Poe 
Language-Based Editor Project.” ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 19, No. 5, 
pp. 21–29.

Fischer, C. N., and R. J. LeBlanc. (1977) UW-Pascal Reference Manual. Madison 

Academic Computing Center, Madison, WI.

Fischer, C. N., and R. J. LeBlanc. (1980) “Implementation of Runtime Diagnos-

tics in Pascal.” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, Vol. SE-6, No. 4, 
pp. 313–319.

Fischer, C. N., and R. J. LeBlanc. (1991) Crafting a Compiler with C. Benjamin-

Cummings, Menlo Park, CA.

Flanagan, D. (2011) JavaScript: The Definitive Guide, 6e. O’Reilly Media, Sebas-

topol, CA.

Flanagan, D., and Y. Matsumoto. (2008) The Ruby Programming Language, O’Reilly 

Media, Sebastopol, CA.

Floyd, R. W. (1967) “Assigning Meanings to Programs.” Proceedings Symposium 

Applied Mathematics. Mathematical Aspects of Computer Science, J. T. Schwartz 
(ed.). American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI.

Frege, G. (1892) “Über Sinn und Bedeutung.” Zeitschrift für Philosophie und Phi-

losophisches Kritik, Vol. 100, pp. 25–50.

Friedl, J. E. F. (2006) Mastering Regular Expressions, 3e. O’Reilly Media, 

Sebastopol, CA.

Friedman, D. P., and D. S. Wise. (1979) “Reference Counting’s Ability to Collect 

Cycles Is Not Insurmountable.” Information Processing Letters, Vol. 8, No. 1, 
pp. 41–45.

Fuchi, K. (1981) “Aiming for Knowledge Information Processing Systems.” Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Fifth Generation Computing Systems. 
Japan Information Processing Development Center, Tokyo. Republished (1982) 
by North-Holland Publishing, Amsterdam.

Gehani, N. (1983) Ada: An Advanced Introduction. Prentice Hall, Englewood 

Cliffs, NJ.

Z01_SEBE8029_12_SE_BIB.indd   718

1/5/18   10:12 PM

 
 
 
 
Bibliography 

  719

Gilman, L., and A. J. Rose. (1983) APL: An Interactive Approach, 3e. John Wiley, 

New York.

Goodenough, J. B. (1975) “Exception Handling: Issues and Proposed Notation.” 

Commun. ACM, Vol. 18, No. 12, pp. 683–696.

Goos, G., and J. Hartmanis (eds.). (1983) The Programming Language Ada Reference 
Manual. American National Standards Institute. ANSI/-MIL-STD-1815-A–1983. 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 155. Springer-Verlag, New York.

Gordon, M. (1979) The Denotational Description of Programming Languages, An 

Introduction. Springer-Verlag, New York.

Graham, P. (1996) ANSI Common LISP. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Gries, D. (1981) The Science of Programming. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Halstead, R. H., Jr. (1985) “Multilisp: A Language for Concurrent Symbolic Com-
putation.” ACM Transactions on Programming Language and Systems, Vol. 7, 
No. 4, October 1985, pp. 501–538.

Halvorson, M. (2013) Microsoft Visual Basic 2013 Step by Step. Microsoft Press, 

Redmond, WA.

Hammond, P. (1983) APES: A User Manual. Department of Computing Report 82/9. 

Imperial College of Science and Technology, London.

Harbison, S. P., III, and G. L. Steele, Jr. (2002) C: A Reference Manual, 5e. Prentice 

Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Henderson, P. (1980) Functional Programming: Application and Implementation. 

Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Hoare, C. A. R. (1969) “An Axiomatic Basis of Computer Programming.” Commun. 

ACM, Vol. 12, No. 10, pp. 576–580.

Hoare, C. A. R. (1972) “Proof of Correctness of Data Representations.” Acta Infor-

matica, Vol. 1, pp. 271–281.

Hoare, C. A. R. (1973) “Hints on Programming Language Design.” Proceed-

ings ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Conference on Principles of Programming 
Languages. Also published as Technical Report STAN-CS-73-403, Stanford 
University Computer Science Department.

Hoare, C. A. R. (1974) “Monitors: An Operating System Structuring Concept.” 

Commun. ACM, Vol. 17, No. 10, pp. 549–557.

Hoare, C. A. R. (1978) “Communicating Sequential Processes.” Commun. ACM, 

Vol. 21, No. 8, pp. 666–677.

Hoare, C. A. R. (1981) “The Emperor’s Old Clothes.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 24, 

No. 2, pp. 75–83.

Hoare, C. A. R., and N. Wirth. (1973) “An Axiomatic Definition of the Programming 

Language Pascal.” Acta Informatica, Vol. 2, pp. 335–355.

Hogger, C. J. (1984) Introduction to Logic Programming. Academic Press, 

London.

Hogger, C. J. (1991) Essentials of Logic Programming. Oxford Science Publications, 

Oxford, England.

Holt, R. C., G. S. Graham, E. D. Lazowska, and M. A. Scott. (1978) Structured 
Concurrent Programming with Operating Systems Applications. Addison-
Wesley, Reading, MA.

Horn, A. (1951) “On Sentences Which Are True of Direct Unions of Algebras.” 

J. Symbolic Logic, Vol. 16, pp. 14–21.

Hudak, P., and J. Fasel. (1992) “A Gentle Introduction to Haskell.” ACM SIGPLAN 

Notices, Vol. 27, No. 5, May 1992, pp. T1–T53.

Z01_SEBE8029_12_SE_BIB.indd   719

1/5/18   10:12 PM

 
 
 
720 

  Bibliography

Hughes, J. (1989) “Why Functional Programming Matters.” The Computer Journal, 

Vol. 32, No. 2, pp. 98–107.

Huskey, H. K., R. Love, and N. Wirth. (1963) “A Syntactic Description of BC 

NELIAC.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 6, No. 7, pp. 367–375.

IBM. (1954) “Preliminary Report, Specifications for the IBM Mathematical FOR-
mula TRANslating System, FORTRAN.” IBM Corporation, New York.

IBM. (1956) “Programmer’s Reference Manual, The FORTRAN Automatic Coding 

System for the IBM 704 EDPM.” IBM Corporation, New York.

IBM. (1964) The New Programming Language. IBM UK Laboratories, Hursley, 

England.

Ichbiah, J. D., J. C. Heliard, O. Roubine, J. G. P. Barnes, B. Krieg-Brueckner, and 
B. A. Wichmann. (1979) “Part B: Rationale for the Design of the Ada Program-
ming Language.” ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 14, No. 6.

IEEE. (1985) “Binary Floating-Point Arithmetic.” IEEE Standard 754, IEEE, 

New York.

INCITS/ISO/IEC. (1997) 1539-1-1997, Information Technology—Programming 

Languages—FORTRAN, Part 1: Base Language. American National Standards 
Institute, New York.

Ingerman, P. Z. (1967). “Panini-Backus Form Suggested.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 10, 

No. 3, p. 137.

ISO. (1998) ISO14882-1, ISO/IEC Standard – Information Technology—

Programming Language—C++. International Organization for Standardization, 
Geneva, Switzerland.

ISO. (1999) ISO/IEC 9899:1999, Programming Language C. American National 

Standards Institute, New York.

ISO/IEC. (1996) 14977:1996, Information Technology—Syntactic Metalanguage— 

Extended BNF. International Organization for Standardization, Geneva, 
Switzerland.

ISO/IEC. (2002) 1989:2002, Information Technology—Programming Languages—

COBOL. American National Standards Institute, New York.

ISO/IEC. (2010) 1539-1, Information Technology—Programming Languages—Fortran. 

American National Standards Institute, New York.

ISO/IEC. (2014) 8652/2012(E), Ada 2012 Reference Manual. Springer-Verlag, 

New York.

Iverson, K. E. (1962) A Programming Language. John Wiley, New York.
Jensen, K., and N. Wirth. (1974) Pascal Users Manual and Report. Springer-Verlag, 

Berlin.

Johnson, S. C. (1975) “Yacc: Yet Another Compiler-Compiler.” Computing Science 

Report 32. AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ.

Jones, N. D. (ed.). (1980) Semantic-Directed Compiler Generation. Lecture Notes in 

Computer Science, Vol. 94. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, FRG.

Kay, A. (1969) The Reactive Engine. PhD Thesis. University of Utah, September.
Kernighan, B. W., and D. M. Ritchie. (1978) The C Programming Language. 

Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Knuth, D. E. (1965) “On the Translation of Languages from Left to Right.” Informa-

tion & Control, Vol. 8, No. 6, pp. 607–639.

Knuth, D. E. (1967) “The Remaining Trouble Spots in ALGOL 60.” Commun. 

ACM, Vol. 10, No. 10, pp. 611–618.

Knuth, D. E. (1968) “Semantics of Context-Free Languages.” Mathematical Systems 

Theory, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 127–146.

Z01_SEBE8029_12_SE_BIB.indd   720

1/5/18   10:12 PM

 
 
 
 
Bibliography 

  721

Knuth, D. E. (1974) “Structured Programming with GOTO Statements.” ACM 

Computing Surveys, Vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 261–301.

Knuth, D. E. (1981) The Art of Computer Programming, Vol. II, 2e. Addison-Wesley, 

Reading, MA.

Knuth, D. E., and L. T. Pardo. (1977) “Early Development of Programming Lan-

guages.” In Encyclopedia of Computer Science and Technology, G. Holzman and 
A. Kent (eds.). Vol. 7. Dekker, New York, pp. 419–493.

Kowalski, R. A. (1979) Logic for Problem Solving. Artificial Intelligence Series, 

Vol. 7. Elsevier-North Holland, New York.

Laning, J. H., Jr., and N. Zierler. (1954) “A Program for Translation of Mathematical 
Equations for Whirlwind I.” Engineering memorandum E-364. Instrumentation 
Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Ledgard, H. F., and M. Marcotty. (1975) “A Genealogy of Control Structures.” 

Commun. ACM, Vol. 18, No. 11, pp. 629–639.

Lippman, S. B., and J. Lajoie. (2012) C++ Primer, 5e. Addison-Wesley, Upper Saddle 

River, NJ.

Lischner, R. (2000) Delphi in a Nutshell. O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, CA.
Liskov, B., R. L. Atkinson, T. Bloom, J. E. B. Moss, C. Scheffert, R. Scheif ler, and A. 

Snyder. (1981) CLU Reference Manual. Springer, New York.

Lomet, D. (1975) “Scheme for Invalidating References to Freed Storage.” IBM Jour-

nal of Research and Development, Vol. 19, pp. 26–35.

Lutz, M. (2013) Learning Python, 5e. O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, CA.
MacLaren, M. D. (1977) “Exception Handling in PL/I.” ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 

Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 101–104.

Marcotty, M., H. F. Ledgard, and G. V. Bochmann. (1976) “A Sampler of Formal 

Definitions.” ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 191–276.

Mather, D. G., and S. V. Waite (eds.). (1971) BASIC, 6e. University Press of New 

England, Hanover, NH.

McCarthy, J. (1960) “Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and Their Com-
putation by Machine, Part I.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 3, No. 4, pp. 184–195.

McCarthy, J., P. W. Abrahams, D. J. Edwards, T. P. Hart, and M. Levin. (1965) LISP 

1.5 Programmer’s Manual, 2e. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

McCracken, D. (1970) “Whither APL.” Datamation, September 15, pp. 53–57.
Metcalf, M., J. Reid, and M. Cohen. (2004) Fortran 95/2003 Explained, 3e. Oxford 

University Press, Oxford, England.

Meyer, B. (1990) Introduction to the Theory of Programming Languages. Prentice 

Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Milner, R., R. Harper, and M. Tof le. (1997) The Definition of Standard ML-Revised. 

MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Milos, D., U. Pleban, and G. Loegel. (1984) “Direct Implementation of Compiler 
Specifications.” POPL ’84 Proceedings of the 11th ACM SIGACT-SIGPLAN 
Symposium on Programming Languages, pp. 196–202.

Mitchell, J. G., W. Maybury, and R. Sweet. (1979) Mesa Language Manual, Version 

5.0, CSL-79-3. Xerox Research Center, Palo Alto, CA.

Moss, C. (1994) Prolog++: The Power of Object-Oriented and Logic Programming. 

Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

Moto-oka, T. (1981) “Challenge for Knowledge Information Processing Systems.” 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Fifth Generation Computing 
Systems. Japan Information Processing Development Center, Tokyo. Republished 
(1982) by North-Holland Publishing, Amsterdam.

Z01_SEBE8029_12_SE_BIB.indd   721

1/5/18   10:12 PM

 
 
 
722 

  Bibliography

Naur, P. (ed.). (1960) “Report on the Algorithmic Language ALGOL 60.” Commun. 

ACM, Vol. 3, No. 5, pp. 299–314.

Newell, A., and H. A. Simon. (1956) “The Logic Theory Machine—A Complex 
Information Processing System.” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, 
Vol. IT-2, No. 3, pp. 61–79.

Newell, A., and F. M. Tonge. (1960) “An Introduction to Information Processing 

Language V.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 3, No. 4, pp. 205–211.

Nilsson, N. J. (1971) Problem Solving Methods in Artificial Intelligence. McGraw-

Hill, New York.

Pagan, F. G. (1981) Formal Specifications of Programming Languages. Prentice Hall, 

Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Papert, S. (1980) MindStorms: Children, Computers and Powerful Ideas. Basic 

Books, New York.

Perlis, A., and K. Samelson. (1958) “Preliminary Report—International Algebraic 

Language.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 1, No. 12, pp. 8–22.

Peyton Jones, S. L. (1987) The Implementation of Functional Programming 

Languages. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Pratt, T. W., and M. V. Zelkowitz. (2001) Programming Languages: Design and 

Implementation, 4e. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Remington-Rand. (1952) “UNIVAC Short Code.” Unpublished collection of dit-
toed notes. Preface by A. B. Tonik, dated October 25, 1955 (1 p.); Preface by 
J. R. Logan, undated but apparently from 1952 (1 p.); Preliminary exposition, 
1952? (22 pp., in which pp. 20–22 appear to be a later replacement); Short code 
supplementary information, topic one (7 pp.); Addenda #1, 2, 3, 4 (9 pp.).

Reppy, J. H. (1999) Concurrent Programming in ML. Cambridge University Press, 

New York.

Richards, M. (1969) “BCPL: A Tool for Compiler Writing and Systems Program-

ming.” Proc. AFIPS SJCC, Vol. 34, pp. 557–566.

Robbins, A. (2005) Unix in a Nutshell, 4e. O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, CA.
Robinson, J. A. (1965) “A Machine-Oriented Logic Based on the Resolution Princi-

ple.” Journal of the ACM, Vol. 12, pp. 23–41.

Roussel, P. (1975) “PROLOG: Manual de Reference et D’utilisation.” Research 
Report. Artificial Intelligence Group, University of Aix-Marseille, Luming, 
France.

Rubin, F. (1987) “‘GOTO Statement Considered Harmful’ considered harmful” 

(letter to editor). Commun. ACM, Vol. 30, No. 3, pp. 195–196.

Rutishauser, H. (1967) Description of ALGOL 60. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Sammet, J. E. (1969) Programming Languages: History and Fundamentals. Prentice 

Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Sammet, J. E. (1976) “Roster of Programming Languages for 1974–75.” Commun. 

ACM, Vol. 19, No. 12, pp. 655–669.

Schorr, H., and W. Waite. (1967) “An Efficient Machine Independent Procedure for 
Garbage Collection in Various List Structures.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 10, No. 8, 
pp. 501–506.

Scott, D. S., and C. Strachey. (1971) “Towards a Mathematical Semantics for Com-
puter Language.” In Proceedings, Symposium on Computers and Automation, 
J. Fox (ed.). Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn Press, New York, pp. 19–46.

Scott, M. (2009) Programming Language Pragmatics, 3e. Morgan Kaufman, 

San Francisco, CA.

Sebesta, R. W. (1991) VAX Structured Assembly Language Programming, 2e. 

Benjamin/Cummings, Redwood City, CA.

Z01_SEBE8029_12_SE_BIB.indd   722

1/5/18   10:12 PM

 
 
 
 
Bibliography 

  723

Sergot, M. J. (1983) “A Query-the-User Facility for Logic Programming.” In Inte-

grated Interactive Computer Systems, P. Degano and E. Sandewall (eds.). North-
Holland Publishing, Amsterdam.

Shaw, C. J. (1963) “A Specification of JOVIAL.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 6, No. 12, 

pp. 721–736.

Smith, J. B. (2006) Practical OCaml. Apress, Springer-Verlag, New York.
Sommerville, I. (2010) Software Engineering, 9e. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Steele, G. L., Jr. (1990) Common LISP The Language, 2e. Digital Press, 

Burlington, MA.

Stoy, J. E. (1977) Denotational Semantics: The Scott–Strachey Approach to Pro-

gramming Language Semantics. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Stroustrup, B. (1983) “Adding Classes to C: An Exercise in Language Evolution.” 

Software—Practice and Experience, Vol. 13, pp. 139–161.

Stroustrup, B. (1984) “Data Abstraction in C.” AT&T Bell Laboratories Technical 

Journal, Vol. 63, No. 8, pp. 1701–1732.

Stroustrup, B. (1986) The C++ Programming Language. Addison-Wesley, Read-

ing, MA.

Stroustrup, B. (1988) “What Is Object-Oriented Programming?” IEEE Software, 

May 1988, pp. 10–20.

Stroustrup, B. (1994) The Design and Evolution of C++. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Stroustrup, B. (1997) The C++ Programming Language, 3e. Addison-Wesley, Read-

ing, MA.

Sussman, G. J., and G. L. Steele, Jr. (1975) “Scheme: An Interpreter for Extended 

Lambda Calculus.” MIT AI Memo No. 349 (December 1975).

Suzuki, N. (1982) “Analysis of Pointer ‘Rotation’.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 25, No. 5, 

pp. 330–335.

Syme, D., A. Granicz, and A. Cisternino. (2010) Expert F# 2.0. Apress, Springer-

Verlag, New York.

Tatroe, K., P. MacIntyre, and R. Lerdorf. (2013) Programming PHP, 3e. O’Reilly 

Media, Sebastopol, CA.

Tanenbaum, A. S. (2005) Structured Computer Organization, 5e. Prentice Hall, 

Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Teitelbaum, T., and T. Reps. (1981) “The Cornell Program Synthesizer: A Syntax-
Directed Programming Environment.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 24, No. 9, 
pp. 563–573.

Tenenbaum, A. M., Y. Langsam, and M. J. Augenstein. (1990) Data Structures Using 

C. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Thomas, D., A. Hunt, and C. Fowler. (2013) Programming Ruby 1.9 & 2.0: The 

Pragmatic Programmers Guide (The Facets of Ruby). The Pragmatic Bookshelf, 
Raleigh, NC.

Thompson, S. (1999) Haskell: The Craft of Functional Programming, 2e. Addison-

Wesley, Reading, MA.

Turner, D. (1986) “An Overview of Miranda.” ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 21, 

No. 12, pp. 158–166.

Ullman, J. D. (1998) Elements of ML Programming. ML97 edition. Prentice Hall, 

Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

van Emden, M. H. (1980) “McDermott on Prolog: A Rejoinder.” SIGART Newslet-

ter, No. 72, August, pp. 19–20.

van Wijngaarden, A., B. J. Mailloux, J. E. L. Peck, and C. H. A. Koster. (1969) 

“Report on the Algorithmic Language ALGOL 68.” Numerische Mathematik, 
Vol. 14, No. 2, pp. 79–218.

Z01_SEBE8029_12_SE_BIB.indd   723

1/5/18   10:12 PM

 
 
 
724 

  Bibliography

Wadler, P. (1998) “Why No One Uses Functional Languages.” ACM SIGPLAN 

Notices, Vol. 33, No. 2, February 1998, pp. 25–30.

Warren, D. H. D., L. M. Pereira, and F. C. N. Pereira. (1979) “User’s Guide to DEC 
System-10 Prolog.” Occasional Paper 15. Department of Artificial Intelligence, 
University of Edinburgh, Scotland.

Watt, D. A. (1979) “An Extended Attribute Grammar for Pascal.” ACM SIGPLAN 

Notices, Vol. 14, No. 2, pp. 60–74.

Wegner, P. (1972) “The Vienna Definition Language.” ACM Computing Surveys, 

Vol. 4, No. 1, pp. 5–63.

Weissman, C. (1967) LISP 1.5 Primer. Dickenson Press, Belmont, CA.
Wexelblat, R. L. (ed.). (1981) History of Programming Languages. Academic Press, 

New York.

Wheeler, D. J. (1950) “Programme Organization and Initial Orders for the EDSAC.” 

Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, Vol. 202, pp. 573–589.

Wilkes, M. V. (1952) “Pure and Applied Programming.” In Proceedings of the ACM 

National Conference, Vol. 2. Toronto, pp. 121–124.

Wilkes, M. V., D. J. Wheeler, and S. Gill. (1951) The Preparation of Programs for an 
Electronic Digital Computer, with Special Reference to the EDSAC and the Use 
of a Library of Subroutines. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

Wilkes, M. V., D. J. Wheeler, and S. Gill. (1957) The Preparation of Programs for an 

Electronic Digital Computer, 2e. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

Wilson, P. R. (2005) “Uniprocessor Garbage Collection Techniques.” Available at 

http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/oops/papers.htm#bigsurv.

Wirth, N. (1971) “The Programming Language Pascal.” Acta Informatica, Vol. 1, 

No. 1, pp. 35–63.

Wirth, N. (1973) Systematic Programming: An Introduction. Prentice Hall, 

Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Wirth, N. (1975) “On the Design of Programming Languages.” Information Pro-
cessing 74 (Proceedings of IFIP Congress 74). North Holland, Amsterdam, 
pp. 386–393.

Wirth, N. (1977) “Modula: A Language for Modular Multi-Programming.” 

Software—Practice and Experience, Vol. 7, pp. 3–35.

Wirth, N., and C. A. R. Hoare. (1966) “A Contribution to the Development of 

ALGOL.” Commun. ACM, Vol. 9, No. 6, pp. 413–431.

Zuse, K. (1972) “Der Plankalkül.” Manuscript prepared in 1945, published in 
Berichte der Gesellschaft für Mathematik und Datenverarbeitung, No. 63 
(Bonn, 1972); Part 3, 285 pp. English translation of all but pp. 176–196 in 
No. 106 (Bonn, 1976), pp. 42–244.

Z01_SEBE8029_12_SE_BIB.indd   724

1/5/18   10:12 PM

 
 
 
 
Index

A
Absolute addressing
manual, 201
pointers and, 280
problems with, 38, 40

Abstract cells, 202, 284
Abstract class, 489, 492,  

515, 517
in C#, 514–515
in C++, 507
in Java, 510

Abstract data types, 19, 

236–237, 312, 485–486, 
549, 560
in Ada, 479
in C#, 461–462
in C++, 453–459, 467–468
in C# 2005, 471
design issues for, 452–453
f loating-point as, 450
in Java, 459–461
in Java 5.0, 468–470
language-defined, 237
object-oriented 

programming and, 352

parameterized, 466–471
in Ruby, 463–466
for stacks, 457, 467, 476
user-defined, 237, 450–451

Abstract method, 489, 514

in C#, 514–515
of a Java abstract class, 512

Abstraction, 2, 15, 19, 125, 

198, 357
beginnings of data, 70–71
benefits of, 19, 80, 225
in BNF, 114
concept, 448–449
data, 19, 80, 366, 449–452
process, 366, 449
in Smalltalk, 84
subprogram, 367
Accept clause body, 553
Accept clauses, 553–559, 561
Access

deep, 437–439
in nested subprograms, 

376, 430
in nonblocking 

synchronized, 569

shallow, 439–441
types, 273

ACM (Association for Com-

puting Machinery), 51
Communications of the 
ACM, 53, 624

GAMM and, 51
Grace Murray Hopper 
Award, 454, 498
Turing Award of, 624
Activation record instance, 
420, 422, 424–435,  
437–439, 647–648
of static ancestors, 431–435

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   725

1/8/18   5:03 PM

725

726 

  Index

Activation records, 420

local_offset of a variable in, 426
in stack, 430
Active subprograms

in referencing environments, 224
in stack-dynamic local variables, 424

Actor tasks, 554, 570
Actual parameters, 203, 251, 343, 369–372, 
374, 378–380, 383–385, 391, 398, 410,  
418, 422, 424, 516, 634, 638, 645, 648,  
661, 662, 667

Ad hoc binding, 393–394
Ad hoc polymorphism, 399
Ada, 12, 33, 55, 74, 198, 211, 373, 376, 391, 

404, 422, 429, 543, 594
2005 version of, 82–83
abstract data types in, 479
assignment statement, 251
attribute grammar of, 130
Boolean operator in, 13
compilers, 23
concurrency in, 552–560
declarations of constrained anonymous 

types, 290
derived types, 290
design process, 79–80
evaluation of, 81–82
exception handling in, 14
exponentiation operator of, 304
functions of, 397
historical background of, 79
implement monitors and monitors of, 550
language overview of, 80–81
packages in, 80, 560
parentheses in, 251
pass-by-value-result of, 397
subrange types, 290
subtypes of, 293, 490
tasks, 552, 560–561, 570, 575
termination of selection construct, 12
type equivalence, 288, 291

Ada 83, 82, 550
Ada 95, 82–83, 543

constructing monitors, 550
pointers of, 396

Addresses, 258, 273, 277–280, 293, 341, 380, 

420–422, 426, 680
of array elements, 293
in memory, 387
offset of, 265, 280
for out-mode parameters, 379
segment of, 280
of variables, 201–202

Aho, Al, 92
AI (artificial intelligence), 6, 93, 688
LISP in, 45–46, 48, 632, 653
in Perl, 93
Project at MIT, 46, 632

ALGOL 58, 113

design effort, 55
overview of, 52
report on, 53

ALGOL 60, 51, 57, 61, 62, 67

BNF in, 55
design process, 53–54
evaluation of, 54–56
example of an, 55–56
overview of, 54
primary deficiency of, 71

ALGOL 68

design process, 71
evaluation of, 72–73
language overview of, 72
orthogonality in, 72

ALGOL Bulletin, 53
Aliases, 201–202, 276, 279, 380–381, 385, 392
Aliasing, 14–15, 201–202, 380–381, 391–392, 

396–397, 410

Allocation, 46, 69, 72, 207–209, 217, 237,  

245–247, 252–253, 275, 281–282, 375, 421
of objects, 492–493
storage, 46, 69, 208, 217, 246–247, 252, 283

Ambiguous grammars, 118–119, 333
AND operator, 153, 155
and then Boolean operator, 13
Anonymous variables, 273
ANSI (American National Standards Institute), 58

on C, 76
Minimal BASIC standard, 62
standardization of C++, 454, 498, 594

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   726

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
 
Antecedents, 144, 147, 683, 690–701
APES system, 710
APL (A Programming Language), 13, 21
origins and characteristics of, 69–70

Append function, 656
append operations, 700
Apple, 87, 88
Apply-to-all functional forms, 628, 649–650
Arithmetic expressions, 41, 58, 90, 117, 165, 

332, 653, 711
associativity in, 305–307
characteristics of, 302–303
coercions in, 313–315
conditional, 308–309
design issues for, 303
grammar for, 175–176, 184, 188
in Lisp, 308
mixed-mode, 313, 314
operand evaluation order in, 309–311
parentheses in, 307
precedence in, 303–305
in Prolog, 711
purpose of, 303
referential transparency in, 310–311
in Ruby, 307–308
rules of operator evaluation order,  

305–307

side effects in, 309–311
Array types, 99, 250–261

array initialization in, 254–255
array operations in, 255–256
design issues for, 250
evaluation of, 258
implementation of, 258–260
indices and, 251–252
jagged arrays in, 256
rectangular arrays in, 256
slices in, 257
subscript bindings in, 252–254

Artificial intelligence (AI). see AI (artificial 

intelligence)

ASCII (American Standard Code for 

Information Interchange), 138, 241, 689

Assemblies, .NET, 474
Assertions, 150

Index 

  727

in axiomatic semantics, 143–144
in Java, 604–605

Assignment statements, 11, 18, 20, 47, 136, 150, 

152, 218, 251, 253, 261, 277, 286
ambiguous grammar for, 118
attribute grammar for simple, 131
in axiomatic semantics, 145–147
compound assignment operators in, 320
conditional targets and, 320
in denotational semantics, 141
as expressions, 322–323
in functional programming languages, 

323–324

grammar for simple, 117–118
mixed-mode, 324
multiple, 323
simple, 319–320
unary assignment data types in, 321

Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). 
see ACM (Association for Computing 
Machinery)
Associative arrays
definition, 261
implementation of, 262–263
structure and operations of, 261–263

Associativity, 127, 176, 181, 302
of operators, 115, 122–123
rules of operator evaluation order, 303, 

305–307

Atomic propositions, 681–683, 685, 689–690, 

698, 711

Atoms, 650

Lisp, 47, 629–630
predicate functions for symbolic, 641
Prolog, 689, 706, 708
AT&T Bell Laboratories, 455
Attribute computation functions, 129
Attribute grammars, 128, 292

basic concepts of, 129
computing attribute values in, 132–133
defined, 129–130
evaluation of, 133–134
examples of, 130–132
intrinsic attributes in, 130
static semantics and, 128–129

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   727

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
728 

  Index

Attributes, 171, 198, 517
binding, 203–204
defined, 129
instance data as, 464
intrinsic, 130
of variables, names, 199, 201
Automatic generalization, 403
Automatic programming, 39
awk scripting language, 92
Axiomatic semantics, 680
assertions in, 143–144
assignment statements in, 145–147
evaluation of, 155
logical pretest loops in, 149–152
program proofs in, 152–155
selection in, 148–149
sequences in, 147–148
weakest preconditions in, 144–145

Axioms, 144, 155, 681, 684

B
B, language, 75
Babbage, Charles, 37, 80, 366
Backtracking, 685, 694, 697, 699, 704–705, 711
Backus, John, 40–41

BNF (Backus-Naur Form) (see BNF 

(Backus-Naur Form))

Fortran by, 18, 41, 624
FP (functional programming), 624–625
speedcoding system by, 39

Backward chaining, 693
Base class, 486
base prefix, 514
Basic (Beginner’s All-purpose Symbolic 

Instruction Code)
design process, 61–62
evaluation of, 62–63
example of, 63
BASIC-PLUS, 62
Bauer, Fritz, 51
BCD (binary coded decimal), 240
Bell Laboratories. see AT&T Bell Laboratories
BINAC computer, 38
binary coded decimal (BCD), 240
Binary operators, 256, 303
Binary semaphore, 547

Binding, 632, 635, 656

of actual parameters to formal parameters, 370
ad hoc, 393–394
attributes to variables, 203–204
deep, 393–394, 437
definition, 203
difference between access, 437
dynamic type, 205–207
exceptions to handlers, C++, 595
exceptions to handlers, Java, 599–600
explicit heap-dynamic variables in, 209–210
implicit heap-dynamic variables in, 210–211
lifetime of, 207
shallow, 393–394, 437
stack-dynamic variables in, 208–209
static type, 314
static variables in, 207–208
static-type, 493, 512
storage, 207, 226
subscript, 252–254
type, 204–207
to a variable, 689

Binding time, 203
Blocked tasks, 542
Blocks

in Ruby, 668
for scope, 213–215

BNF (Backus-Naur Form), 53–54

describing lists in, 115
fundamentals of, 114–115
origins of, 113–114
Böhm, Corrado, 332, 359
Boolean abstract data types, 461–462
Boolean data types, 76, 332
Boolean expressions, 316–318, 661
boolean type variables, 76, 90, 241, 581
Borland JBuilder, 29
Bottom-up parsers, 173–174
LR parsers and, 186–190
parsing problem for, 184–186
shift-reduce algorithms for, 186

Bottom-up resolution, 693
Bound variables, 207, 634
Bounded wildcard types, 403
Bounds, 72, 259–260, 401
Boxing, 509

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   728

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
 
Breadth-first searches, 694
break statements, 338–339, 604

multiple-selection statements and, 338–340
in user-located loop control mechanisms, 350

Brinch Hansen, Per, 548–549, 551–552
Built-in iterators, 354
Business applications, 6
Business record computerization. see COBOL
Byron, Augusta Ada, 80
Byte code, 27
byte integer, 238
byte operands, 304

C
C, 198

compilers, 23
encapsulation in, 472
evaluation of, 76–77
expressivity in, 13
for statement, 345–347
historical background of, 75–76
language categories in, 20
limited dynamic strings of, 246
local variables in, 376
mixed-mode assignment in, 324
name and structure type equivalence of, 291
orthogonality in, 10
parameters, 384
pointers in, 278
popularity of, 3
portable system of, generally, 75–77
preprocessor instruction, 27
rules and exceptions in, 10
static specifier of, 208
struct data type, 263
switch statement of, 337
type checking in, 14
union constructs in, 271
user-located loop control in, 350–351
writability of, 13

C#, 164, 198, 237, 238, 240, 242–244, 247–250, 
253, 254, 256, 257, 263, 270, 371–372, 376, 
411, 453, 461–462, 539, 543, 549
4.0 version, 580
5.0 version, 99
2010 version, 206

Index 

  729

abstract data types in, 461–462, 479
arrays of, 253–255, 388
assemblies, 473–474
Boolean types in, 241
classes, 479, 551
code segments, 349
decimal data types of, 240
declaration of a variable, 208
design process for, 98
dynamic binding, 514–515
encapsulation constructs in, 461–462
enumeration types in, 247, 248
evaluation of, 99–100, 515
event handling in, 613–616
example of, 100
for statement of, 347
general characteristics, 513
generic collection classes, 353
generic library classes, 353
goto, 355–356
heap-dynamic and stack-dynamic objects  

in, 210

inferencing process, 667
information hiding in, 462
inheritance in, 513–514
integer types of, 238
lambda expression in, 667–668
language overview of, 98–99
List, 253
method for displaying strings in, 339
mixed-mode expressions in, 324, 398
multiple selection structure, 359
name forms, 199–200
named constants of, 226
nested class, 515
nesting method in, 407
as .NET language, 98–100
object-oriented programming in, 513–515
objects of, 253
overloaded subprograms in, 398
parameter passing methods of, 379, 384, 

387–388

pointers of, 279–281, 395
predefined overloaded subprograms of, 398
reference type of, 294
references of Java, 279–280

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   729

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
730 

  Index

C# (continued)

ref lection in, 526–528
selection statement nesting in, 334
static semantics rule of, 339
string classes of, 243
struct data type, 263
support for concurrency, 581
switch statement, 339
threads, 570–575
a var declaration of a variable, 204
variable declarations in, 215–216

C++, 16, 20, 29, 50, 55, 74, 76

abstract data types in, 453–459, 467–468
arrays, 250, 253–254
assignment statement of, 203
Boolean types of, 241
classes, 499–509
code segment, 210
constant reference parameters, 389
constructors in, 457
declaration of a variable, 208
declarations in, 215, 217
Delphi, 88
design process for, 86
destructors in, 457
dynamic binding in, 504–507
dynamic binding of values, 226
encapsulation constructs in, 456, 472–473
enumeration types of, 248–249
evaluation of, 87, 507–509
exception handling in, 14, 594–598
for statement of, 216, 347
formal parameters of, 370, 384
functions, 222
general characteristics, 497
global variable of, 217
information hiding in, 456
inheritance in, 497–504
integer types of, 238
language overview of, 87
limited dynamic strings of, 246
local variables in, 376
mixed-mode assignment in, 324
names in, 199–200
namespaces, 475–476
nesting selectors in, 334

object-oriented programming in, 496–509
objects, 499
operators, 311, 313
overloaded subprograms in, 398
parameterized abstract data types, 467–468
pattern-matching capabilities of, 244
pointers in, 22, 99, 202, 210, 277–282, 

393–394

reference parameters in, 384
reference types in, 278
static specifier of, 208
struct data type in, 263
switch statement of, 337
typedef in, 291
unary operator of, 275
union constructs in, 271
user-located loop control in, 350–351

C89, 76, 198, 215, 241, 332, 350, 386
C99, 76, 198, 199, 215, 217, 241, 317, 332, 345, 

347, 350, 386
C# 2005, 399, 403, 411

assemblies in, 473–474
generic classes in, 471
generic functions in, 403
namespaces in, 475–476
parameterized abstract data types in, 471

Call chains, 426
Calls

dynamic binding of method, 519–521
indirect, 394–396
semantics of subprogram, 418

Cambridge Polish, 631
Cambridge University, 40, 75
Camel notation, 199
Caml, 50, 658
canonical LR algorithm, 187
Captured variables, 668
CAR functions, 268, 639–640, 643–646, 650, 

698, 702

Case expressions, 338–339
Case sensitivity, 200
case statements, 73, 316, 341
catch, 566–567, 594, 599–603, 606, 617
C-based languages, 36, 198–200, 211, 213, 
252, 255, 305, 306, 308, 314–322, 335, 
345–347, 367, 430, 436, 449, 589, 669

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   730

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
 
CBL (Common Business Language), 57
CDE (Solaris Common Desktop  

Environment), 29

CDR functions, 639–640, 643–646, 650, 698, 702
Central processing units (CPUs), 17–18, 418
CGI (Common Gateway Interface), 94
chain_offset, 431, 434, 439
Chambers, Craig, 508
char arrays, 242, 254
char type parameters, 400
Character string types
in C and C++, 254
design issues for, 242
evaluation of, 245
implementation of, 245–247
string length options in, 244–245
string operations in, 242–244

Character types, 241–242
Checked exceptions, 601
Child class, 486
Chomsky, Noam, 113–114
Church, Alonzo, 627
Cii Honeywell/Bull language, 80
Clark, K. L., 689
Clarke, L. A., 220
Class instance record (CIR), 519
Class methods, 487
Class variables, 487
Classes, 486

abstract, 489
base, 486
child, 486
derived, 486
of exceptions, 599
inner, 512
interlocked, 573, 582
local nested, 513
parent, 486
super, 486
wrapper, 90

Clausal form, 683–684
Clients, 450–453, 456, 459, 472, 476, 487, 503
Clocksin, W. F., 705
CLOS (Common LISP Object System), 653
Closed accept clause, 557
Closed-world assumption, 706

Index 

  731

Closures, 405–407
CML (Concurrent ML), 576, 592
COBOL, 6, 23

computerizing business records in, 56–61
design process for, 57–58
evaluation of, 58–61
FLOW-MATIC and, 57
form of a record declaration, 264
historical background of, 57

Coercions, 90, 287, 291

in arithmetic expressions, 313–315
of deproceduring, 72
Colmerauer, Alain, 77, 688
Column major order, 259
Common Business Language (CBL), 57
Common Gateway Interface (CGI), 94
Common Intermediate Language (CIL), 474, 527
Common LISP, 49–50, 625, 651–653

backquote operator (`), 652
lists in, 268–269

Common LISP Object System (CLOS), 20, 653
Communicating Sequential Processes (CSP), 

356–357, 360, 555

Communications of the ACM, 53, 624
Compatible types, 286
Competition synchronization, 539–541

in Ada, 557–559
in Java, 564–565
with monitors, 549
need for, 541
with semaphores, 547–548
Compiler design, 4, 129, 162, 203

BNF-based, 55

Compiler implementation, 23
Complex data types, 240
Compound assignment operators, 320
Compound terms, 681
Computer architecture, 17–19, 69, 198,  

535–537, 624

Concurrency. see also Competition 

synchronization; Cooperation 
synchronization
in Ada, 552–560
in C# threads, 570–575
categories of, 537–538
in Concurrent ML, 576

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   731

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
732 

  Index

Concurrency (continued)

design issues for language support for, 

543–544

explicit locks in, Java 5.0, 569–570
F# support for, 577–578
in functional languages, 575–578
fundamental concepts of, 539–543
in High-Performance Fortran, 578–580
introduction to, 534–539
in Java threads, 560–570
language design for, 543
message passing in, 551–552
monitors in, 549–551
in Multi-LISP, 575
multiprocessor architectures in, 535–537
nonblocking synchronization in, 569
protected objects in, 559–560
reasons for using, 538–539
semaphores in, 544–548
statement-level, 578–580
subprogram-level, 539–544
task termination, 555, 557
thread priorities in, 563–564
Concurrent ML (CML), 576, 592
Concurrent Pascal, 549
Conditional expressions, 46, 308–309, 343,  

626, 655

Conditional targets, 320
Conjunctions, 690
CONS functions, 639–640
Consequents, 144, 683, 690
const constants, 226
Constructors, 453, 457
Context-free grammars, 113, 114, 710
Continuation, 596
Control expressions, 332
Control f low, 537, 596, 637–638
exception-handling, 593
paths, 330
statements, 92

Control statements, 330
Control structures, 2, 5, 331
Cooper, Alan, 64–65
Cooper, Jack, 80
Cooperation synchronization, 539

in Ada, 557

in Java, 565–568
with monitors, 549–550
with semaphores, 544–547

Coroutines, 71, 407–410
Costs of languages, 15–17
Counter-controlled loops, 344

in C-based languages, 345–347
design issues for iterative, 345
in functional languages, 348
in Python, 347–348

CPUs (central processing units), 17–18, 418
CSP (Communicating Sequential Processes), 

356–357, 360, 555

Currie, Malcolm, 79
Curried functions, 658
Currying, 657
Cut, Prolog, 704–705

D
Dahl, Ole-Johan, 70–71
Dangling pointers, 275–276
Dangling references, 275
Data members, 456
Data structures, 352–355
Data types, 9–11, 37, 50. see also Abstract  
data types; Array types; Associative 
arrays
Boolean, 241
character, 241–242
character string, 242–247
complex, 240
decimal, 240–241
definition, 236
descriptors, 237
enumeration types, 247–249
equivalence in, 288–291
f loating-point, 239–240
f loating-point as an abstract, 450
integer, 238–239
of a language, 198
in Lisp, 629–631
lists, 268–270
numeric, 238–241
ones-complement notation, 239
pointer, 273–280
primitive, 238–242

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   732

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
 
record, 263–266
reference, 278–285
string length options in, 244–245
string operations in, 242–244
in terms of precision and range, 239
theory and, 292–293
tuple, 266–267
twos-complement notation, 239
union, 270–272
user-defined, 72, 73, 236
user-defined abstract, 450–451

Data-based iterators, 360
Dead task, 542
Deadlocks, 543
Deallocation, 207, 492–493
Decimal data types, 240
Declaration order, 215–216
Declarative languages, 680, 686–687
Decorating parse trees, 132
Decrement fields, 573
Deep access, 437–439
Deep binding, 393
Deferred reference counting, 282
Definitions

of records, 264
in Scheme program, 634–636
in subprograms, 367–368

Delegates, 395–396
delete operator, 456, 457
in associative arrays, 261
C++, 210, 253, 276, 499
explicit deallocation using, 497

Delphi, 88, 98, 462
Denotational semantics, 137–142, 628, 669

assignment statements in, 141
evaluation of, 142
examples of, 138–139
expressions in, 140–141
logical pretest loops in, 141–142
state of programs and, 140

Department of Defense (DoD), 57, 58,  

79–80

Dependents, 54, 55, 79–83
DEPOSIT subprogram, 545
Depth-first searches, 694
Dereferencing pointers, 277

Index 

  733

Derivations, 115–117
Derived classes, 486, 500–501
Derived types, 289
Descriptors, 237
Design issues

for abstract data types, 452–453
for arithmetic expressions, 303
for array types, 250
for character string types, 242
for enumeration types, 247
for exception handling, 591–594
for functions, 396–397
for iterative counter-controlled  

statements, 345

for language support for concurrency,  

543–544, 580

for logically controlled loop, 348–349
for multiple selectors, 336–337
for names, 199
for object-oriented languages, 489–494
particular to pointers, 274
specific to records, 264
for subprograms, 374
trade-offs, 21–22
for two-way selectors, 332
for union types, 271

Destructors, 457
Diamond inheritance, 491
Dictionaries, 97, 262
Dijkstra, Edsger, 356

guarded commands by, 356–359, 551
on PL/I, 68
semaphores by, 544
on synchronization operations, 549

Direct left recursion, 180
Discriminated unions, 271
Disjoint tasks, 539
dispose, 281
DLLs (dynamic link libraries), 65, 474
DO CONCURRENT constructs, 43
DoD (Department of Defense), 57, 58
Domain set, 625
Dot notation, 249, 264
Double f loating-point data types, 239
do-while statements, 350
Dynabook, 83

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   733

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
734 

  Index

Dynamic binding, 205, 488–489

in Ada, 82
in C#, 514–515
in C++, 87, 226, 504–507
in Java, 512
of messages to methods, 493, 495
of method calls to methods, 484, 519–521
in object-oriented programming,  

488–489, 493

in Ruby, 517
in Smalltalk, 495–496
of subprogram calls, 82

Dynamic chains, 426
Dynamic dispatch, 488
Dynamic languages, 69–70
Dynamic length strings, 245
Dynamic link libraries (DLLs), 65, 474
Dynamic links, 422–423
Dynamic scoping, 220–222, 437–441, 632
Dynamic semantics, 129

axiomatic semantics as, 142–155
denotational semantics as, 137–142
operational semantics as, 134–137

Dynamic type binding, 205–207
Dynamic type checking, 286

E
Eager approach, 282
EBNF (Extended BNF), 125–127
ECMA (European Computer Manufacturers 

Association), 94
Edinburgh syntax, 689
Edwards, Daniel J., 632
Eich, Brendan, 94
Elaboration, 208
Elemental operators, Fortran 95+, 198
Elliptical references, 265
else-if clause, 341
Encapsulation constructs

in C, 472
in C#, 461–462, 473–474
in C++, 456, 472–473, 475–476
introduction to, 471–472
in Java, 476–477
naming, 474–478
in Ruby, 463, 477–478

entry clauses, 553
Enumeration constants, 247
Enumeration types, 247–250, 337

in C#, 249
in C++, 248–249
design issues for, 247–248
designs, 247–249
evaluation of, 249–250
in F#, 249
in Java 5.0, 249
in ML, 249

Environment pointers (EPs), 418
Epilogue of subprogram linkage, 419
EPs (Environment pointers), 418
EQ? function, 641
Equivalence, 288–291
Erasure rule, 181
Errors

in arithmetic expressions, 315

European Computer Manufacturers Association 

(ECMA), 94

EVAL functions, 632, 635–636, 650–651
Evaluation environments, 653
Event handling

in C#, 613–616
introduction to, 608–609
in Java, 609–613

Event listeners, 610–611
Events, 591–592, 608–610
Exception handling

in Ada, 14
basic concepts of, 589–591
in C++, 14, 594–598
design issues for, 591–594
introduction to, 588–594
in Java, 598–605
in Python, 605–607
in Ruby, 607–608

Exceptions, 315
Exclusivity of objects, 489–490
Executable images, 25
Execution efficiency, 670
Expert systems, 709–710
Explicit declarations, 204
Explicit heap-dynamic variables, 209–210
Explicit locks in, Java 5.0, 569–570

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   734

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
 
Explicit type conversions, 315
Expressions

assignment statements as, 322–323
Boolean, 143, 316–318, 661
in C#, 324, 398
case, 338–339
coercion in, 313–315
conditional, 46, 308–309, 343, 626, 655
control, 332
in denotational semantics, 140–141
errors in, 315
mixed-mode, 313
in recursive-descent parsers, 175–180
relational, 316
short-circuit evaluation in, 318–319
unambiguous grammar for, 120

Expressivity, 13
Extended accept clause, 556
Extended BNF (EBNF), 125–127
eXtensible Stylesheet Language 
Transformations (XSLT), 21

extern qualifiers, 217

F
F#, 29, 403–404, 625, 663–666

generic functions in, 403–404
generic library classes, 353
support for concurrency, 577–578

Fact statements, 689–690
Farber, J. D., 70
Fatbars, 357
Feature multiplicity, 8
FETCH subprogram, 545
Fetch-execute cycle, 18, 26
FGCS (Fifth Generation Computing  

Systems), 688
Fibonacci number, 659
Fields, 264–265
Fifth Generation Computing Systems  

(FGCS), 688

Filter, 656
Finalization, 593
finalize methods, 509
finally clauses, 603–604
FindAll method, 667
Finite automata, 165

Index 

  735

Finite mappings, 293
Firm coercion, 72
First-order predicate calculus, 681
Fixed heap-dynamic arrays, 252–253
Fixed stack-dynamic arrays, 252–253
flex arrays, 72
float, 14, 90, 205, 286–289, 313, 324,  

387, 394
in C, 472
in C#, 395, 461, 572
in C++, 595
coercions, 90
in strong typing, 287
in type checking, 14, 286–287
in type conversions, 313–315

float variable, 287
Floating-point data types, 239, 240, 450
Floating-point operations, 37, 39–40, 75,  

287, 306
FLOW-MATIC, 57
FLPL (Fortran List Processing Language), 46
Flynn, Michael J., 536
for statements, 216

in C-based languages, 345–347, 352
in Java, 13, 352
in Python, 347–348

foreach statements

in C#, 99, 254, 353
of Perl, 360

Form, 12
Formal parameters, 368–370
Fortran, 5, 18, 61, 62, 66, 198
design process for, 41
evaluation of, 43–45
exponentiation in, 306
High-Performance, 578–580
historical background of, 40–41, 51, 251, 

316, 330, 624

label parameters in, 590
nested subprograms in, 429
Read statement, 588–589
stand-alone statement, 320
subprograms in, 419
versions of, 41–43, 67, 211, 263, 373, 386
Fortran List Processing Language (FLPL), 46
Forward chaining, 693

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   735

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
736 

  Index

FP (functional programming), 45–50, 623–671
Free Software Organization, 689
Free unions, 271
Fully attributed parse trees, 130
Fully qualified references, 265
Functional compositions, 648–649
Functional compositions in Scheme, 639–640
Functional forms, 627–628, 648–650
Functional programming (FP), 45–50, 623–671
Functional programming languages, 294, 310, 

330, 369, 406
assignment statements in, 323–324
Common Lisp, 651–653
concurrency in, 575–578
Concurrent ML (CML), 576
F#, 577–578, 663–666
functional forms in, 627–628
fundamentals of, 628–629
Haskell, 658–663
imperative languages supporting, 666–669
imperative languages vs., 669–671
introduction, 624–625
LISP, 629–632
mathematical functions in, 625–628
Multi-LISP (ML), 575, 653–658
Scheme, 633–651
simple functions in, 626–627

Functions

of Ada, 397
attribute computation, 129
of C++, 222
of C# 2005, generic, 403
of C#, generic, 399–401
CAR, 268, 639–640, 643–646, 650, 698, 702
CDR, 639–640, 643–646, 650, 698, 702
composition, 627
CONS, 639–640
curried, 658
design issues for, 396–397
EVAL, 650
of F#, generic, 403–404
of Java 5.0, generic, 401–403
of JavaScript, 667
mathematical, functional programming 

languages, 625–628

in Scheme, 634–636
as subprograms, 373

Functors, 695
future constructs, 575

G
GAMM (German Society for Applied 
Mathematics and Mechanics), 51

Garbage collection, 97
Gates, Bill, 65
Genealogy of languages, 35
Generality, 16
Generate and test, 705
Generation, 112
Generators, 112–113, 660
Generic subprograms
in C++, 399–401
in C# 2005, 403
in F#, 403–404
in Java 5.0, 401–403

German Society for Applied Mathematics and 

Mechanics (GAMM), 51
getPriority methods, 563
Getter methods, 516
Glennie, Alick E., 40–41
Global scope, 217–219
GNOME, 29
Go, 85
Goals, 691–692
Google, 455, 537
Gosling, James, 89
GOTO, 188–190
Grammars. see also Attribute grammars

ambiguous, 118–119, 333
context-free, 113, 114, 710
derivations and, 115–117
LL grammar class, 180–183
recognizers and, 127–128
for simple assignment statements, 117
for a small language, 116
unambiguous, 120–122, 124–125
van Wijngaarden, 72

Griswold, R.E., 70
Guarded commands, 356–359, 551
Guards, 544, 559, 659
GUIs (graphical user interfaces), 13, 608–609

C#, 614
Java, 609–610
UNIX and, 29

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   736

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
 
using Windows Forms, 614, 617
VB, 63

H
Hammond, P., 710
Handles, 185–187
Hansen, Brinch, 551
Harbison, Samuel P., 338
Hashes, 93, 96, 261, 353, 360, 471
Haskell, 369, 625, 658–663
Headed horn clauses, 686, 690–691
Header files, 473
Headless horn clauses, 686, 690–691
Heap-dynamic arrays, 252
Heap-dynamic variables, 209–211, 275, 280
Heaps, 209–210, 246
Heavyweight tasks, 539
Hejlsberg, Anders, 98
Hidden concurrency, 537
Higher-order functions, 627–628
High-Order Language Working Group 

(HOLWG), 79

High-Performance Fortran (HPF), 578–580
Hoare, C.A.R., 71
on Ada, 81
and ALGOL 60, 73
on language design, 13, 21, 359
message passing design, 551–552
on monitors, 549
Pascal by, 73
on pointers, 280

HOLWG (High-Order Language Working 

Group), 79
Hopper, Grace

award in name of, 454, 498
compiling systems by, 39
on programming languages, 57

Horn clauses, 686
HPF (High-Performance Fortran), 578–580
HTML (HyperText Markup Language), 406

introduction to, 6, 21
JavaScript and, 94–95, 162
JSP and, 101–102
PHP and, 96
XML and, 101
Hursley Laboratory, 67
Hybrid implementation systems, 26–27

Index 

  737

HyperText Markup Language (HTML). see 
HTML (HyperText Markup Language)

Hypotheses, 686

I
IAL (International Algorithmic Language), 52
IBM, 46

701 computer, 39
704 computer, 40–41, 631, 639
700-series machines, 51
COMTRAN, 57
Fortran developed by, 40–45
mainframe design, 9–10
orthogonality and, 10
PL/I developed by, 66–69
SHARE and, 53

“The IBM Mathematical FORmula 

TRANslating System: FORTRAN,” 41

Identifiers, 111, 237
Identity operands, 304
IEEE Floating-Point Standard, 239

format, 239

IEEE Floating-Point Standard 754, 239
IF selector function, 637
if statements

assignments and, 322
in Extended BNF, 125
Java, 115, 179, 334
JSP and, 101–102
in multiple-selection statements, 341–343
nested, 339
in nesting selectors, 333–336
in recursive-descent parsers, 175
rule for, 125, 175
in selector expressions, 336

IFIP (International Federation of Information 

Processing), 73

if-then-else statements, 308, 342
Imperative programming languages, 397, 624, 

626, 666–669
functional languages supporting, 666–669
functional languages vs., 669–671

Implementation methods
array types, 258–260
associative arrays, 262–263
character string types, 245–247
of compiler, 23

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   737

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
738 

  Index

Implementation methods (continued)

hybrid implementation systems, 26–27
Just-in-Time (JIT) implementation  

system, 27

parameter-passing methods, 382–383
pointer types, 280–285
record types, 265–266
reference types, 280–285
union types, 273

Implicit declarations, 204
Implicit heap-dynamic variables, 210–211
Implicit locks in, 569–570
import declarations, 477
include statements, 538
Incremental mark-sweep garbage  

collection, 284

Indicants, 72
Indices, 251–252
Inference rules, 692, 693, 709–710

for computing the precondition for a while 

loop, 149

general form of, 144
resolution, 684
as rule of consequence, 146
for selection statements, 145, 148
in sequences, 147, 152
Inferencing process, 692–695
Infix operators, 303
Information hiding

C#, 462
C++, 456
Ruby, 464–465

Information Processing Language (IPL), 45
Inheritance

C#, 513–514
C++, 497–504
Java, 510–512
Ruby, 517
Smalltalk, 495

Inherited attributes, 129
Initial values, 226
Initialization, 254–255
Initialization of objects, 494
Inner classes, 512
Inout mode parameter passing, 379
Instance data storage, 519

Instance methods, 463, 487
Instance variables, 463, 487
Instantiation, 689
Instruction-level concurrency, 535
int, 14, 90, 167–170, 247

in C, 203, 213, 254, 314, 472
in C#, 216, 395, 461
in C++, 222, 226, 278, 395, 398, 400, 458, 

468, 596, 605

in F#, 404
in Java, 202, 225, 286, 287, 313, 468,  

566–569, 572, 581

in ML, 654–655
in Python, 238
in type checking, 286, 386
unary minus operator and, 304

int integer, 238
int type parameters, 400
int variable, 286
integer, 238–239
byte, 238
int, 238
long, 238
short, 238
types of, 238–239

Intercession, 522
Interface abstract class, 510
Interlocked classes, 573, 582
International Algorithmic Language  

(IAL), 52

International Federation of Information 

Processing (IFIP), 73

International Standards Organization (ISO),  

94, 241

Interpreter, 631–632
Intrinsic attributes, 130
Intrinsic condition queue, 565
Intrinsic limitations, 708
IPL (Information Processing Language), 45
is operators, 695
ISO (International Standards Organization),  

94, 241

Iterative statements, 343–355

counter-controlled loops and, 344–348
data structures for, 352–355
design issues for, 345, 348–349

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   738

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
 
examples, 349–350
for statements, 345–348
logically controlled loops and, 348–350
user-located loop controls as, 350–351

Iverson, Kenneth P., 69

J
Jacopini, Giuseppe, 330, 332, 359
Jagged arrays, 256
JARs (Java Archives), 474
Java, 509–513, 539, 543

5.0, generic functions in, 401–403
5.0, parameterized abstract data types, 

468–470

abstract data types, 459–461, 468–470
assertions in, 604–605
binding exceptions to handlers, 599–600
classes of exceptions, 599–600
competition synchronization in, 564–565
concurrency in Java threads, 560–570
cooperation synchronization in, 565–568
design choices, 600–602
design process, 89
dynamic binding in, 226, 512
evaluation of, 90–92, 461, 513, 570, 605
event handling with, 609–613
event model, 610–613
exception handlers of, 599–600
exception handling in, 598–605
explicit locks in, 569–570
expressivity in, 13
feature multiplicity in, 8
finally clauses, 603–604
for statements of, 216, 347
general characteristics, 509
imperative-based object-orientation of, 

89–92

inheritance in, 510–512
integer types of, 238
language overview of, 89–90
mixed-mode assignment in, 324
names in, 199
nested classes, 512–513
nesting selectors in, 334
nonblocking synchronization in, 569
objects of, 509

Index 

  739

overloaded subprograms in, 398
packages, 476–477
parameterized abstract data types in, 

468–470
parameters, 384
pattern-matching capabilities of, 244
popularity of, 3
primitive scalar types and classes of, 528
priorities of threads, 563–564
ref lection in, 523–525
semaphores in, 564
Swing GUI components, 609–610
switch statement of, 337
Thread class, 561–563
user-located loop control in, 350
while and do statements, 350

Java Archives (JARs), 474
Java Server Pages Standard Tag Library (JSTL), 

21, 101

Java Virtual Machine, 27
JavaScript, 6, 20, 26, 29, 609, 670
anonymous function in, 667
dynamic type binding in, 205–206
functions for, 667
origins and characteristics of, 94–96

join methods, 561–562
JOVIAL, 53
JSP, 100–102
JSTL (Java Server Pages Standard Tag Library), 

21, 101

Just-in-Time (JIT) compilers, 91, 98, 163
Just-in-Time (JIT) implementation system, 27

K
Kay, Alan, 83–84
Kemeny, John, 61–62
Kernighan, Brian, 92, 356
Keys, 261
Keyword parameters, 370
Keywords, 370
Knuth, Donald, 40, 55, 103, 187, 356
Korn, David, 92
Kowalski, Robert

on logic-based semantic networks, 710
Prolog by, 77, 688

Kurtz, Thomas, 61

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   739

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
740 

  Index

L
Lambda calculus, 627
Lambda expressions, 50, 91, 627, 635

in C#, 667–668
in Java 8, 668
in Python, 668
in Scheme, 635

Language design
Ada, 80
ALGOL 58, 52–53
ALGOL 60, 53–56
ALGOL 68, 72
BASIC, 62
C#, 98–99
C++, 87
categories in, 20–21
COBOL, 56–61
computer architecture, 17–19
concurrency, 543
early design process, 51
for Fortran, 43
Hoare’s observation, 13, 21, 359
hybrid implementation system, 26
inf luences on, 17–20
Java, 89–90
PL/I, 67, 68
Prolog programs, 77–78
SIMULA 67, 71
Smalltalk, 84
trade-offs, 21–22

Language generators, 112–113
Language recognizers, 112
Laning and Zierler system, 41
Lattner, C., 87
Lazy approach, 282
Lazy evaluation, 661–663
LCF (Logic for Computable Functions), 50
Learning new languages, 2
Left factoring, 183
Left recursive grammar rules, 123
Left-hand side (LHS), 114–115, 123, 138, 
173–174, 181, 184, 186, 188, 190,  
192, 207
grammar rules for, 115, 123, 173

Leftmost derivations, 116
Lerdorf, Rasmus, 96

let

in F#, 664
in Haskell, 660
in ML, 214, 656
in Scheme, 214, 646–647
scope of, 215
Level numbers, 264
Lexemes, 111, 164
Lexical analysis, 163–171

lexical analyzer, 164–165
process, 164
Lifetime, 207–211
Lightweight task, 539
Limited dynamic length strings, 245
Linkers, 25, 420
Linking, 25
Linking and loading, 25
LISP, 205, 220, 222, 237. see also Common 
LISP; Multi-LISP (ML); Scheme  
language
allocation and deallocation in, 281
artificial intelligence and, 45–46
common, 651–653
data structures in, 47, 48, 629–631
data types in, 629–631
descendants of, 49–50
design goals of, 282
design process for, 46
evaluation of, 48–49
expressions in, 308
functional programming in, 47
implementation of, 639
interpreter in, 631–632
languages related to, 50
list processing and, 45–46
ref lections in, 527
single-size allocation heap in, 281–282
syntax of, 48

List comprehensions, 270
LIST functions, Scheme, 268
Lists, 115

in Common LISP, 268–269
descriptions of, 115
functions of, 638–641
in Multi-LISP (ML), 269
predicate functions for, 641–642

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   740

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
 
in Prolog, 698–703
in Scheme language, 269
simple, 47, 630, 643–644, 646
types of, 268–270

Liveness, 543
LiveScript, 94
LL algorithms, 173
LL grammar class, 180–183
Load modules, 25
Loaders, 420
Local nested classes, 513
Local referencing environments, 375–376
Local variables, 217–219, 376, 426
Local_offset, 426
Locks, 569–570
Locks-and-keys approach, 281
Logic for Computable Functions (LCF), 50
Logic programming languages
applications of, 709–710
clausal form in, 684, 686, 691
expert systems and, 709–710
natural-language processing, 710
overview of, 686–688
predicate calculus for, 680–684
Prolog, 688–708
relational database management systems 

and, 709

resolution construction, 684–685
theorem-proving in, 684–686

Logical concurrency, 537
Logically controlled loops, 348–350
long integer, 238
Loop invariants, 149–153
Loop parameters, 344
Loop variables, 346
Loops

in axiomatic semantics, 149–152
counter-controlled, 344–348
logically controlled, 348–350
user-located, 350–351

Lost heap-dynamic variables, 276–277
LR parsers, 186–190
Lua, 279

arrays in, 254
enumeration types of, 249

L-value, 201

Index 

  741

M
MAC OS X, 87
Mark-sweep garbage collection, 283
Markup languages, defined, 21
Markup-programming hybrid languages, 100–102
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 41
match expressions, 272
Matching subgoals, 692
Matching type parameters, 595
Mathematical functions, 625–628
Matsumoto, Yukihiro, 97
Mauchly, John, 38
McCabe, F. G., 689
McCarthy, John, 46, 629, 631–632
McCracken, Daniel, 21
Meek coercion, 72
Mellish, C. S., 6, 705
Member functions, 456, 505
Memory cells, 198, 200, 202
Memory leakage, 276–277
Message interface, 486
Message protocol, 486
Message-passing model, 550
Messages

binding dynamically, 493, 495
in object-oriented languages, 486
passing of, 486, 489, 490, 498, 515,  

551–552
Metadata, 522
MetaLanguage (ML), 50
Metalanguages, 114
Metasymbols, 126
Method calls, 519–512
Methods, 486
Microsoft, 65

.NET computing platform, 86, 98, 163
Visual Studio .NET by, 29

Milner, Robin, 50
MIL-STD 1815, 80
MIMD (Multiple-Instruction, Multiple-Data) 

computers, 536
Minsky, Marvin, 46
Miranda, 50
MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), 41

AI Project, 46
LISP at, 46

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   741

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
742 

  Index

MIT (continued)

Lisp at, 629, 633
Scheme language, 49
Whirlwind computer, 41

Mixed inheritance, 511
Mixed-mode assignment statements, 324
Mixed-mode expressions, 324
ML (MetaLanguage), 50
M-notation, 631
Modules, 477–478
Monitors, 549–551
MSDOS.exe, 64
Multicast delegates, 396
Multi-LISP (ML), 575, 653–658, 671

lists in, 269

Multiparadigm programming, 498
Multiple assignment statements, 323
Multiple inheritance, 487, 491–492
Multiple-Instruction, Multiple-Data (MIMD) 

computers, 536

Multiple-selection statements
design issues for, 336–337
examples of, 337–340
implementation of, 340–341
using if, 341–343
Multiprocessors, 535–537
Multithreaded program, 569, 574, 578

N
Name type equivalence, 288
Named constant, 224–226
Names

in C#, 199
in C++, 199–200
case sensitive, 200
in C-based languages, 199–200
design issues for, 199
forms, 199–200
in Java, 199, 200
keywords, 200
in PHP, 199
reserved words and, 200
in Ruby, 199
special words, 200
variable, 199, 201

Narrowing type conversions, 302

National Physical Laboratory, 67
Natural operational semantics, 135
Naur, Peter, 53, 113
NCC (Norwegian Computing Center), 70
Negation problem, Prolog, 706–708
Nested classes
in C#, 515
in Java, 512–513
object-oriented programming, 493–494

Nested list structures, 47, 630
Nested subprograms, 376, 429–435
Nesting classes, 494
Nesting selectors, 333–336
nesting_depth, 431
.NET languages, 27, 29, 98, 353, 474, 527, 574, 

582, 613, 663

NetBeans, 29
Netscape, 94
Neumann, John von, 17
new, 458, 492, 509

for allocation of heap objects, 275
in C#, 461, 513–514
in C++, 209–210, 253, 456
in heap management, 281
in Java, 469
in Ruby, 516

New Programming Language (NPL), 67
Newell, Allen, 45
next iterators, 352
Nil values, 47, 273
Nonblocking synchronization, 569
nonlocal, 219
Nonstrict languages, 661
Nonterminal symbols, 114
Norwegian Computing Center (NCC), 70
NOT operators, 316, 691, 707
NPL (New Programming Language), 67
NULL, 642
Numeric data types, 238
Numeric predicate functions, 637
Numeric type

complex values, 240
decimal data types, 240–241
f loating-point data types, 239–240
integer, 238–239
Nygaard, Kristen, 70

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   742

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
 
Index 

  743

O
Object slicing, 493
Objective-C, 87–88
Object-oriented constructs, 519–521
Object-oriented languages, 19, 85, 206, 219, 

279, 291, 360
allocation of objects in, 492–493
deallocation of objects in, 492–493
design issues in, 489–494
dynamic binding in, 493
exclusivity of objects in, 489–490
initialization of objects in, 494
multiple inheritance in, 491–492
nested classes in, 493–494
single inheritance in, 491–492
static binding in, 493
subclasses vs. subtypes in, 490–491
Object-oriented programming, 3, 20,  

485, 663
in C#, 513–515
in C++, 85–88, 496–509
inheritance, 485–488
instance data storage, 519
in Java, 89–92, 509–513
message passing in, 551–552
in Objective-C, 87–88
in Ruby, 515–518
in Smalltalk, 83–85, 494–496
Stroustrup on, 498–499
support for, 494–518

Objects, 486

allocation of, 492–493
in C++, 497
of C#, 253
in concurrency, 559–560
deallocation of, 492–493
exclusivity of, 489–490
initialization of, 494
in Java, 509
in Ruby, 516

OCaml, 50, 205, 484, 625, 658, 663
Open accept clause, 557
Operand evaluation order, 309–311
Operational semantics, 134–137

evaluation of, 136–137
natural, 135

problems with, 135
process of, 135–136
structural, 135

Operator evaluation order, 303–309
Operator overloading, 8, 98, 311–313
Operator precedence, 119–122
Operator precedence rules, 304
Optimization, 15
or else statements, 334
OR operators, 271
Orthogonality, 9–11
otherwise, 659
Out mode parameter passing, 378
Output functions, 636
Overf low, 315
Overloaded operators, 311–313
Overloaded subprograms, 398
Overridden methods, 487, 491
override commands, 487, 514

P
Package scope, 476
Package specification, 552
Packages, 80, 476–477
Pairwise disjointness test, 182
Papert, Seymour, 83
Paradigms of programming, 498–499
Parameter profiles, 398
Parameterized abstract data types

in C++, 467–468
in C# 2005, 471
in Java 5.0, 468–470

Parameter-passing methods, 376

of common languages, 383–385
design considerations in, 389
examples of, 389–392
implementation models for, 377–382
implementation of, 382–383
semantic models of, 377

Parameters

actual, 369
array formal, 372
formal, 369
keyword, 370
in multidimensional arrays, 387–389
positional, 370

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   743

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
744 

  Index

Parameters (continued)

for subprograms, 368–372
subprograms as, 392–394
type checking, 385–387

Parametric polymorphism, 399
params, 99
Parent class, 486, 491

differences between subclasses and,  

486–487
Parentheses, 307
Parse trees, 24–25, 117–118
Parsing, 25, 55, 119

bottom-up, 173–174, 183–190
complexity of, 174–175
introduction to, 171–172
LL grammar class in, 180–183
LR parsers for, 186–190
recursive-descent, 175–180
shift-reduce algorithms for, 186
top-down, 172–173
Partial correctness, 152
Partial evaluation, 658
Pascal, 55, 248, 276, 281, 289, 295, 376, 394, 

549, 577
Concurrent, 549
evaluation of, 74–75
historical background, 73
Turbo, 98

Pass-by-assignment, 385
Pass-by-copy, 380
Pass-by-name, 381–382
Pass-by-reference, 380–381
Pass-by-result, 378–379
Pass-by-value-result, 379–380
Passed by value, 378
pcall constructs, 575
PDA (Pushdown automaton), 186
Peripheral processors, 535
Perl, 92–94, 341, 350

array assignments, 255
arrays, 92, 253
assignment statements in, 322
associative arrays in, 261
binary logic operators of, 317
built-in pattern-matching operations, 244
clause form, 334

coercion rules for mixed-mode  

assignment, 324

compound assignment operators of, 320
conditional targets on assignment 

statements, 320
dynamic scoping in, 220
enumeration types of, 249
expressions in, 303, 309
foreach statement, 99, 360
as a general-purpose language, 93
hashes, 96, 261, 262
hybrid implementation system, 27
mixed-mode assignment in, 324
multiple-source assignment statements  

in, 323

nesting selectors in, 334
origins and characteristics of, 92–94
passing parameters of, 384
strings in, 245
subscripting in, 251
unary arithmetic operators in, 321
Unicode in, 241
as a UNIX utility, 93
user-located loop control in, 350
variable names in, 199
variables in, 93
Perlis, Alan, 44, 51
PHP, 6, 26, 29, 217, 386, 670

access to HTML form data, 96
built-in pattern-matching operations, 244
foreach statement, 99
formal parameters of, 370
function definitions, 217
global variables of, 217–218
origins and characteristics of, 96
relational operators of, 316
scalar types of, 339
switch statement, 339
type binding in, 205, 286
variable names in, 199

Phrases, 185–186
Physical concurrency, 537
pipeline operators (| >), 665
Plankalkül, 36–37
PL/I, 66–69

design process, 67

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   744

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
 
Index 

  745

evaluation of, 68–69
historical background, 66
language overview of, 67–68

Pointer types

in C and C++, 277–278
dangling, 275–276, 280–281
design issues with, 274
heap management and, 281–285
implementation of, 280–281
lost heap-dynamic variables in, 276–277
operations in, 274–275
problems with, 275–277
representations of, 280

Polonsky, I. P., 70
Polymorphic references, 488
Polymorphic subprograms, 399
Polymorphism, 399, 411, 488
Portability, 16
Positional parameters, 370
Postconditions, 143, 147

in assignment statements, 145–147
introduction to, 143
in logical pretest loops, 149–152
in program proofs, 152–155
in selection statements, 148–149
in sequences, 147–148
weakest precondition and, 144–145

Posttest, 344
Precedence, 303–305
Precision, 239
Predicate calculus

clausal form, 683–684
collections of propositions, 684–686
for logic programming languages, 680–684
propositions, 681–683

Predicate functions, 129, 637, 641–642
Predicate transformers, 150
Prefix operators, 321
Preprocessors, 27–29
Pretest, 349–350
Primitive data types, 9

Boolean, 241
character, 241–242
complex, 240
decimal, 240–241
f loating point, 239

integer, 238–239
numeric, 238–240

Primitive numeric functions, 633–634
Principle of substitution, 490
Priorities of tasks, 563–564
Priorities of threads, 571
private, 464, 500–503, 512–513

in C#, 461
in C++, 456, 462
in Ruby, 464

Procedure-oriented programming, 20
Procedures, 372–373
Process abstraction, 449
Processes, 539
Producer-consumer problem, 540
Productions, 114
Program counter, 18
Program proofs, 152–155
Programming design methodologies, 19–20
Programming domains

artificial intelligence in, 6
business applications in, 6
scientific applications in, 5
Web software and, 6

Programming environments, 29
Prolog, 6, 21, 680–681, 688–708

arithmetic expression in, 695–698
basic elements of, 688–703
closed-world assumption in, 706
deficiencies of, 703–708
design process for, 77
evaluation of, 78
fact statements, 689–690
goal statements, 691–692
inferencing process of, 692–695
intrinsic limitations in, 708
language overview of, 77–78
list structures in, 698–703
negation problem in, 706–708
origin of, 688
resolution order control in, 703–705
rule statements, 690–691
terms, 689
Prolog++, 20, 78
Prologue of subprogram linkage, 419
Properties, C#, 461

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   745

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
746 

  Index

Propositions, 681–683
protected access modifiers, 462
Protected objects, 550, 559–560
Protocol, 368, 450, 489, 495, 511, 514, 517
for event-handling methods, 610–611,  

614, 617

function’s, 393–394
message, 486
of overloaded subprogram, 398
of a subprogram, 368

Prototypes, 368
Pseudocodes, 37–40

introduction to, 37–38
related work, 40
Short Code, 38–39
Speedcoding, 39
UNIVAC “compiling” system, 39

public, 464, 500–503, 512–513

in C#, 461
in C++, 456, 462
in Ruby, 464

Pure interpretation, 26
Pure virtual function, 506
Pure virtual method, 489
Pushdown automaton (PDA), 186
Python, 217

arrays in, 254, 269
associative arrays in, 262
binary arithmetic operations in, 405
compound assignment operators of, 320
control expressions in, 332
data types in, 238, 240
declarations in, 257
enumeration types of, 249
exception handling in, 605–607
formal parameters of, 370–372
function header of, 370–371
global variable in, 217, 218
global variables of, 376
for statement of, 347–348
hashes, 96, 264
list comprehension in, 270
nesting functions in, 219
origins and characteristics of, 96–97
parameter passing methods of, 385
polymorphism in, 399

range function, 270, 348
records, 263
ref lective operations in, 527
scopes in, 223
selection statement, 335
selector statement, 341–342
slice reference, 257
strings of, 243–244
subprogram headers of, 367
subprograms of, 397, 411, 472
then and else clauses, 333
tuple type of, 266–267, 293
type binding in, 205
Unicode in, 241
user-located loop control in, 350–351
variables of, 250

Q
Quantifiers, 682–683
Quasi-concurrency, 408
Quasi-concurrent subprograms, 537
Queries, 709–710
Quicksort algorithm, 661
QUOTE, 638, 652

R
Race conditions, 540
Radio buttons, 609–611, 614
raise statements, 606, 617
Raised exceptions, 591, 595, 598
RAND Corporation, 45
Range, 239

set, 625–626
Raw methods, 401
RDBMSs (Relational database management 

systems), 709
Read statement, 588
Readability, 7–8, 15, 249
Reader macros, 652
Readers, 625
Read-evaluate-print loops (REPLs), 633
readonly constants, 226
Ready task, 541
Real types, 133, 654–655
Recognition, 112
Record types

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   746

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
 
definition of records in, 264/
evaluation of, 265
implementation of, 265–266
references to fields in, 264–265

Rectangular arrays, 256
Recursion, 427–429, 626
Recursive rules, 115
Recursive-descent parsers, 175–183
LL grammar class in, 180–183
recursive-descent subprogram, 175–180

ref type, F#, 577
Reference counters, 282
Reference parameters, 279, 384
Reference types

dangling pointers and, 280–281
heap management and, 281–285
implementation of, 281–285
of Java and C#, 280
representations of, 280
variables, 278–279

Referencing environments, 223–224
Referential transparency, 310–311, 628
Ref lection, 522

in C#, 526–528
in Java, 523–525

Refutation complete, 685
Regular expressions, 12, 244
Regular grammars, 113, 165
Regular languages, 165
Relational database management systems 

(RDBMSs), 709

Relational expressions, 316
Relational operators, 316
Release semaphore subprogram, 544–548
Reliability, 14–15
Rendezvous, 552, 554
repeat, 18
REPLs (read-evaluate-print loops), 633
Reserved words, 199–200
Resolution, 684–686
bottom-up, 693
closed-world assumption in, 706
defined, 684
order control, 703–705
in Prolog, 692–695, 703, 705
top-down, 693

Index 

  747

Resumes, 408, 410
Resumption, 592
Returned values, 397
Returns, 418
reverse functions, 702
Richards, Martin, 75
Right recursive grammar rules, 123
Right-hand side (RHS), 114, 123, 138, 174, 

181, 186, 188, 207
Ritchie, Dennis, 75–76, 356
Rossum, Guido van, 96
Roussel, Phillippe, 77, 688, 711
Row major order, 259
Ruby

abstract data types in, 463–466
binary logic operators of, 317
built-in pattern-matching operations, 244
case expressions, 339, 341
case statement, 342
classes of, 463–464
compound assignment operators of, 320
constructors in, 463
dynamic binding, 517
encapsulation of, 463
enumeration types of, 249
evaluation of, 466, 517–518
exception handling in, 607–608
exponentiation in, 306
formal parameters of, 370, 372
forms of multiple-selection constructs, 339–340
general characteristics, 515–517
hashes, 262–263
information hiding in, 464–465
inheritance in, 517
iterators of, 360
modules, 477–478
object-oriented programming in, 515–518
objects in, 516
origins and characteristics of, 97–98
parameter passing methods of, 385
polymorphism in, 399
records, 263
selection statement, 335
subprogram headers of, 367
type binding in, 205
user-located loop control in, 350

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   747

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
748 

  Index

Rule of consequence, 146
Rules, 114–115, 117, 120
run methods, 560–561, 570
Running task, 542
Run-time stacks, 424
Russell, Stephen B., 632
R-value, 202

S
Satisfying subgoals, 692
Scalable algorithms, 535
Schedulers, 541
Scheme language, 49

apply-to-all functional forms in, 649–650
code-building functions in, 650–651
control f low in, 637–638
defining functions in, 634–636
examples of function definitions in, 643–646
functional compositions in, 648–649
functional forms in, 648–650
interpreter in, 633
LET, 646–647
list functions in, 638–641
lists in, 269
numeric predicate functions in, 637
origins of, 633
output functions in, 636
predicate functions in, 641–642
primitive numeric functions in, 633–634
tail recursive functions in, 647–648

Schwartz, Jules I., 53
Scientific applications, 5
Scope

blocks for, 213–215
declaration order for, 215–216
dynamic scoping, 220–222, 437–441
global, 217–219
lifetime and, 222–223
named constants and, 224–226
referencing environments and, 223–224
static scoping, 220
in subprograms, implementing, 437–441

Scott, Dana, 142
Scripting languages, 92–98

JavaScript, 94–96
Perl, 92–94

PHP, 96
Python, 96
Ruby, 97–98

Scripts, 162
select statements, 555–556
Selection, 148–149
Selection statements

multiple-selection, 336–343
postconditions in, 148–149
two-way, 332

Selector expressions, 336
Semantic domains, 137
Semantics. see also Axiomatic semantics; 

Denotational semantics
dynamic, 134–155
introduction to, 110–111
natural operational, 135
operational, 134–137
static, 128–129
structural operational, 135

Semaphores, 544–548
Sentences, 111
Sentential forms, 116
Sequences, 147–148
Sergot, M. J., 710
Server tasks, 554
Servlet containers, 101
Setter methods, 464, 516
S-expressions, 632
Shallow access, 439–441
Shallow binding, 393–394
SHARE, 51, 53, 67
Shared inheritance, 491
Shaw, J. C., 45
Shift-reduce algorithms, 186
Short Code, 38–39
short integer, 238
Short Range Committee, 58
Short-circuit evaluation, 318–319
Side effects, 309–311, 396–397
SIGPLAN Notices, 80, 103
SIMD (Single-Instruction, Multiple-Data) 

computers, 536
Simon, Herbert, 45
Simple assignment statements, 130, 687
Simple functions, 626–627

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   748

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
 
Simple lists, 630, 643–644
Simple phrases, 185
Simplicity, 8–9, 13, 73–75, 163
SIMULA 67, 19, 384, 453, 485–486, 498, 500

design process for, 70–71
language overview of, 71
support for coroutines in, 71
Single inheritance, 487, 491–492
Single-Instruction, Multiple-Data (SIMD) 

computers, 536
Single-size cells, 281–282
sleep methods, 562, 577
Slices, 242, 257
Smalltalk, 86, 494–496

dynamic binding, 495–496
evaluation of, 496
general characteristics, 494–495
inheritance in, 495

SNOBOL, 69–70
Solaris Common Desktop Environment  

(CDE), 29

Source languages, 23, 26, 41
special, 50
Special words, 12
Speedcoding, 39
SQL (Structured Query Language), 709
Stack-dynamic arrays, 54, 252
Stack-dynamic local variables, 421–429
Stack-dynamic variables, 208–209
Stanford University, 73
start methods, 561
Start symbols, 115
State diagrams, 165
State of programs, 140
Statement-level concurrency, 535, 538, 578–580
Statement-level control structures

counter-controlled loops, 344–348
for statements, 345–348
guarded commands by, 356–359
iterative statements, 343–355
logically controlled loops, 348
two-way selection statements, 332
unconditional branch statement, 355–356

Static ancestors, 212
Static arrays, 252
Static binding, 204–205, 493

Index 

  749

Static chaining, 430–435
Static length strings, 244
Static links, 430–431
static modifiers, 208, 253
Static parents, 212, 430–431
Static scoping, 49, 50, 376, 435, 439, 472, 633, 

652, 653

Static semantics, 128–129
Static type bindings, 204–205
Static variables, 209, 210, 375

in binding, 207–208

static_depth, 431
Steele Jr., Guy L., 338
Steelman requirements document, 80
Stepsize, 344
Stichting Mathematisch Centrum, 96
Storage bindings, 207–211
Strachey, Christopher, 142
Strawman requirements document, 79–80
Strict programming languages, 661
Strong typing, 287
structs, 10, 36, 90, 449, 453, 513

in C#, 99, 462, 479

Structural operational semantics, 135
Structure type equivalence, 288
Structured Query Language (SQL), 709
Structures, 689–690
Subclasses, 486, 489–490
Subgoals, 704–706
Subprogram calls, 367
Subprogram definition, 367
Subprogram headers, 367
Subprogram linkage, 418
Subprogram-level concurrency, 539–544
Subprograms

in C++, 399–401
in C# 2005, 403
calling indirectly, 394–396
characteristics of, 366–367
closures, 374, 405–407
coroutines, 407–410
definitions in, 367–368
design issues for, 374, 396–397
in F#, 403–404
functions as, 372–373
fundamentals of, 366–373

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   749

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
750 

  Index

Subprograms (continued)
generic, 374, 399–404
in Java 5.0, 401–403
local variables in, 375–376
multidimensional arrays and, 387–389
nested, 376
overloaded, 374, 398
parameter profile of, 368
parameter-passing methods, 376–392
parameters as, 392–394
parameters in, 368–372
procedures as, 372–373
protocol of, 368
user-defined overloaded data types in, 

404–405

Subprograms, implementing

blocks in, 436–437
calls in, 418
deep access in, 437–439
dynamic scoping in, 437–441
of nested subprograms, 429–435
with recursion, 427–429
returns in, 418
shallow access in, 439–441
stack-dynamic local variables for, 421–429
static chaining, 430–435
without recursion, 425–427

Subrange types, in Ada, 290
Subscript bindings, 252–254
Subscripts, 251
Substring references, 242
subtype enumeration type, 290
Subtype polymorphism, 399
Subtypes, 293, 490–491
Sun Microsystems, 89, 94
Superclass, 486, 500
Swing GUI components, 609–610
Symbolic atoms and lists, 641–642
Symbolic logic, 681
Synchronization, 536, 539. see also 

Competition synchronization; 
Cooperation synchronization
of CML, 576
explicit locks as, 569–570
nonblocking, 569
of threads, 573–574

Synchronous message passing, 551–552
Syntactic domains, 137–139
Syntax. see also Attribute grammars
ambiguous grammars in, 118–119
analysis, 163
analyzer, 24, 28
associativity in, 122–123
BNF and, 113–114, 126
context-free grammars and, 113, 114
derivations in, 115–117
design, 12
in Extended BNF, 125–127
fundamentals of, 114–115
generators in, 112–113
grammars and, 115–117, 127–128
if-then-else statements, 308, 342
of Java, 110, 111
of JavaScript, 94
of LISP, 48
list descriptions in, 115
of ML, 50
operator precedence in, 119–122
parsing and, 117–118
of Python, 97
recognizers in, 112, 127–128
of Ruby, 98
of Smalltalk, 84, 86
unambiguous grammars in, 120, 124–125

Synthesized attributes, 129
Syracuse University, 684
System.Object, 98
Systems programming, 66, 75
Systems software, 22

T
Tail recursive functions, 647–648
Task(s), 539–544

concurrent execution of, 543
descriptors, 544
heavyweight, 539
lightweight, 539
states, 541–542
termination, 555, 557
task specifications, 552–553
Task termination, 555
Task-ready queue, 542, 562

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   750

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
 
Template functions, 399
Terminal symbols, 118, 138, 176
Terminal values, 344
terminate, 557
Terms, 689
Ternary operators, 309
Tests, 661
Texas A&M University, 454, 498
Text boxes, 609
Theorem-proving, 680, 684, 691
Theory of data types, 236
Thompson, Ken, 75
Threads, 539

in C#, 570–575
in Java, 560–570
priorities of, 563–564
synchronization of, 573–574
Thread class, 561–563
Threads of control, 537
throw statements, 620
Thrown exceptions, 599
throws clauses, 601
Tokens, 114, 164–166
Tombstones, 280–281
Top-down parsers, 172–173
Top-down resolution, 693
Total correctness, 152
Tracing models, 696
Trimming, 72
Tripod, 64, 65
try blocks, 569, 571
try clauses, 594–596, 600, 602–604
Tuples, 266–267
Turing machine, 631
Turner, David, 50
twos complement, 239
Two-way selection statements
clause forms in, 332–333
control expressions for, 332
design issues for, 332–333
nesting selectors in, 333–336
selector expressions in, 336

Type bindings

dynamic, 205–207
static, 204–205

Type checking, 14, 207, 286–287

Index 

  751

Type conversions, 313–315
Type, defined, 202
type enumeration type, 247–250
Type equivalence, 288–291
Type error, 286
Type inference, 204
typedef, 291

U
Unambiguous grammars, 120–122, 124–125

for if-else, 124–125

Unary assignment data types, 311–312, 321
Unary operators, 321
Unchecked exceptions, 601, 617
Unconditional branch statements, 355–356
undef, 93, 140–141
undefined, 254
Underf low, 315
Ungar, David, 508
Unicode, 51, 241
Unification, 685, 692
Uninstantiated variables, 708
union, 273
Union types, 270–273

design issues for, 271
discriminated vs. free unions, 271
evaluation of, 273
in F#, 271–272
implementation of, 273

UNIVAC, 38–39
UNIVAC Scientific Exchange (USE), 51
University of Aix-Marseille, 77, 688
University of Edinburgh, 50, 77, 688
University of Utah, 83
UNIX, 29, 93
Unlimited extent, 406
unsafe, C#, 90, 279
USE (UNIVAC Scientific Exchange), 51
User-located loop control mechanisms, 350–351
using directive, 476

V
val statements, 656
Value, 202
Value types, 273
van Rossum, Guido, 96

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   751

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
752 

  Index

van Wijngaarden grammars, 72
var declarations, 204
Variables, 200–202, 237

addresses of, 201–202
explicit heap-dynamic variables, 209–210
implicit heap-dynamic variables, 210–211
names of, 201
scope of, 211–213
type of, 202
value of, 202

Variable-size cells, 284–285
VAX minicomputers, 9
VB (Visual BASIC), 13, 63
VDL (Vienna Definition Language), 136–137
Vector processors, 535–537
vehicle class, 486
Vienna Definition Language (VDL), 136–137
Virtual method tables (vtables), 519
virtual reserved word, 528
Visible variables, 211
Visual BASIC (VB), 13, 63
Visual Studio, 29
void, 10, 367, 371
void * pointers, 278
von Neumann architecture, 17–18, 26, 624
von Neumann bottlenecks, 26
vtables (virtual method tables), 519

W
wait semaphores, 544–548
Wall, Larry, 92
Weakest preconditions, 144–145
Web browsers, 534
Web software, 6

Weinberger, Peter, 92
Well-definedness, 16
Wheeler, David J., 40
when clause, 557
while, 90

Java, 110, 111
in logical pretest loops, 149–152
loops, 213, 350, 566, 573
statement, 318, 322, 349–350

Whitaker, Lt. Col. William, 79
Widening type conversions, 313
Widgets, 608–609
Wildcard types, 402–403
Wileden, J. C., 220
Wilkes, Maurice V., 40
Windows, 64, 65
Wirth, Niklaus, 73
Wolf, A. L., 220
Wrapper classes, 90
Writability, 13

X
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (Xerox 

PARC), 84

XML (eXtensible Markup Language),  

101–102

XSLT (eXtensible Stylesheet Language 

Transformations), 101

Y
yacc, 128, 189

Z
Zuse, Konrad, 36–37

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   752

1/8/18   5:03 PM

 
 
 
 
Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   753

1/8/18   5:03 PM

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   754

1/8/18   5:03 PM

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   755

1/8/18   5:03 PM

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   756

1/8/18   5:03 PM

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   757

1/8/18   5:03 PM

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   758

1/8/18   5:03 PM

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   759

1/8/18   5:03 PM

Z02_SEBE8029_12_SE_IDX.indd   760

1/8/18   5:03 PM
